 

NATIONAL
SECURITY
STRATEGY

OF THE
UNITED STATES

THE WHITE HOUSE
JANUARY 1987

"Freedom, peace and prosperity...
that's what America is all
about. . . for ourselves, our friends,
and those people across the globe
struggling for democracy.”

(Q.,...ux(2...‘..

 

Contents

I. An American Perspective...1

ll. Fundamentals of U.S. National
Security Strategy...3

U.S. SECURITY IN A COMPLEX AND CHANGING
WORLD. . . 3

U.S. INTERESTS. . . 4

MAIOR OBJECTIVES IN SUPPORT OF U.S.
INTERESTS. . . 4

PRINCIPAL THREATS TO U.S. INTERESTS. . .6

III. U.S. Foreign PoIicy...9

CONTINUITY OF BASIC GOALS . . . 9
INSTRUMENTS OF FOREIGN POLICY. . . 9
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC POLICY... II

POLITICAL AND INFORMATIONAL ELEMENTS OF
NATIONAL POWER... 73

REGIONAL POLICIES . .. I3

Western Hemisphere. . . 13

Western Europe. . . 14

East Asia and Pacific... 15

Soviet Union and Eastern Europe...l6
Middle East and South Asia.. . 17
Africa . . . 18

 

IV. U.S. Defense Policy...19
INTRODUCTION. . . 19

TAKING ADVANTAGE OF U.S. STRENGTHS AND
SOVIET WEAKNESSES. . . 20

MAINTENANCE OF A STRATEGIC DETERRENT. . . 27

ARMS CONTROL. . . 23

MAINTENANCE OF A CONVENTIONAL
DETERRENT.. .26

SPACE SUPPORT OF NATIONAL SECURITY. . . 37

INTELLIGENCE SUPPORT OF NATIONAL
SECURITY. . .37

LOW INTENSITY CONFLICT. . . 32

V. Executing the Strategy...35
FOREIGN POLICY CAPABILITIES. . . 35
DEFENSE CAPABILITIES. . .36

INTEGRATING NATIONAL SECURITY
CAPABILITIES .. .40

VI. Looking Forward to the
1990's . . . 41

 

‘a an
. ......~ . was... .»,.

  

. ~. 35

 

.  I

I. An American Perspective

In the early days of this Administration we laid the
foundation for a more constructive and positive
American role in world affairs by clarifying the
essential elements of U.S. foreign and defense policy.

Over the intervening years, we have looked objectively
at our policies and performance on the world scene to
ensure they reflect the dynamics of a complex and
ever-changing world. Where course adjustments have
been required, I have directed changes. But we have
not veered and will not veer from the broad aims that
guide America's leadership role in today's world:

0 Commitment to the goals of world freedom, peace
and prosperity;

0 Strong and close relationships with our Alliance
partners around the world;

I Active assistance to those who are struggling for
their own self-determination, freedom, and a
reasonable standard of living and development;

0 Willingness to be realistic about the Soviet Union,
to define publicly the crucial moral distinctions
between totalitarianism and democracy; and

0 Seeking meaningful ways of working with the
Soviet leaders to prevent war and make the world a
more peaceful place.

The foundation of a sound National Security Strategy,
laid in the early days of this Administration, has held
firm and served us well. Our economic, political and
military power is resurgent. The Western democracies
are revitalized, and across the world nations are turning
to democratic ideas and the principles of the free
market. In all of this, the United States continues to
encourage those who seek the benefits of our
democratic way of life.

While the United States has been the leader of the free
world since the end of the Second World War, we have

not acted alone. During that war and in the succeeding
four decades, our strategy has been based on

partnership with those nations that share our common
goals.

As the world has changed over the years, the
differences between nations striving to develop
democratic institutions and those following the
totalitarian banner have come into sharp focus. As
future changes take place in human rights, advanced
technology, quality of life, and the global economy, our
example will continue to exert tremendous influence
on mankind. The United States is on the right side of
this historic struggle and we have tried to build a
lasting framework for promoting this positive change.

This National Security Strategy Report builds on the
efforts of the Administration, Congress, and the
American people over the past six years. But any
strategy document is only a guide. To be effective, it
must be firmly rooted in broad national interests and
objectives, supported by an adequate commitment of
resources, and integrate all relevant facets of national
power to achieve our national objectives. It must
provide a framework within which more specific and
detailed objectives can be identified by those executive
branch agencies charged with stewardship over various
elements of the nation's power. And it must guide the
creation of specific plans for attainment of those more
detailed objectives.

For this reason, the annual presentations to the
Congress by the Secretary of State and Secretary of
Defense play a key role in supporting the objectives
outlined in this report. In their respective areas of
Foreign and Defense Policy, they develop detailed
plans of action to sustain our National Strategy,
advance U.S. interests and most importantly, reduce the
risk to our nation and our allies.

‘What follows is this Administration's effort to articulate

the National Security Strategy of the United States—a
blueprint for future freedom, peace, and prosperity.

iv!-VGH

ll. Fundamentals of U.S. National

Security Strategy

U.S. SECURITY IN A
COMPLEX AND
CHANGING WORLD

In the years following World War II, the United States
faced, for the first time, an inescapable responsibility
for world affairs. No longer protected by nearly perfect
fortresses of oceans, allied with countries devastated by
war, and presented with irrefutable evidence of Soviet
expansionist aspirations, the United States shouldered
the dual burden of facilitating the restoration of a world
economic order and arresting the spread of the Soviet
Union's peculiar brand of totalitarianism and
communism.

The United States responded to the threats posed by
Moscow with a policy of containment. Containment, as
a strategy for world peace, entailed three distinct
elements.

The first element, U.S. defense policy, involved forward
deployment of military forces as necessary to deter and
contain Soviet military expansion. In practice, this
meant keeping, for the first time in our history, large
military formations on the soil of allies in Western
Europe and East Asia. As Soviet nuclear weapons
delivery systems grew, it also required a large strategic
force, to augment the deterrence provided by the
conventional forces of the United States and its allies.
Thus our military security system rested primarily on
two strategic zones, Europe and East Asia, backed by
our nuclear deterrent forces.

The second element, U.5._international economic
policy, involved economic recovery programs for

Western Europe and Japan. It also required U.S.
leadership in establishing and managing the
international monetary system, and encouraging
regional and global free-trade agreements.

The third element, U.S. policy toward the Third World,
included both economic and security assistance. It also
had a profound political component: decolonization,
self-determination, and support for the evolution toward
democracy. The Soviet Union opposed us in the Third
World with a policy of ”wars of national liberation,”
through which they sought to exploit the instability of
emerging nations to establish Marxist-Leninist regimes
based on the Soviet model.

The three postwar decades witnessed important
successes for our National Strategy. World war was
avoided. Europe and Japan regained their prosperity,
with the help of massive U.S. assistance, and most of
the Third World was decolonized. Containment,
however, was an expensive policy. But because the
United States had the lion's share of the developed
world's economic power, we could carry the burden.

The postwar era came to an end during the 19705. The
causes of its demise were threefold. First, the success of
U.S. economic policies in Europe and East Asia
dramatically changed the distribution of wealth and
power within our alliance systems. The United States
no longer had an overwhelming economic position vis-
a-vis Western Europe and the East Asia rimland. And
our success in deterring Soviet military aggression in
these two strategic zones created growing public belief
that direct Soviet aggression in these two regions had
become less likely.

Second, the Soviet military buildup and the projection
of Soviet power into Cuba, Nicaragua, the Middle East,

3

 

Southeast and Southwest Asia, and Africa required
changes in strategy for implementing our containment
policy. Particularly significant was the Soviet Union's
attainment of strategic nuclear parity with the United
States.

Third, the political awakening in the Third World
created civil wars and regional conflicts that threatened
to draw the United States and the Soviet Union into
direct military confrontations. And economic
developments, particularly in the energy area,
contributed to political instability and caused
destabilizing effects in the international monetary
system.

In such a significantly different world, the foundations
of strategic planning had to be reconsidered. U.S.
military superiority in strategic forces no longer exists
and the continued growth of Soviet military capabilities
applicable to Europe, the Persian Gulf, and other

important areas, pose a continuing threat to regional
security.

Today it is more important than ever before that our
National Security Strategy be based on a solid
understanding of U.S. interests and objectives and a

realistic approach to dealing with the Soviet Union and
other threats to US. security.

U.S. INTERESTS

U.S. National Security Strategy reflects our national
interests and presents a broad plan for achieving the
national objectives that support those interests. The key
national interests which our strategy seeks to assure
and protect include:

1. The survival of the United States as a free and
independent nation, with its fundamental values and
institutions intact.

2. A healthy and growing U.S. economy.

3. The growth of freedom, democratic institutions, and
free market economies throughout the world, linked
by a fair and open international trading system.

4. A stable and secure world, free of major threats to
U.S. interests.

5. The health and vigor of U.S. alliance relationships.

MAJOR OB/ECTIVES
IN SUPPORT OF
U.S. INTERESTS

U.S. national security objectives are statements of I
broad goals which support and advance national
interests. As such, they are not intended to be appli 
mechanically or automatically, but constitute a gene i
guide for policy development in specific situations I.
which call for the coordinated use of national powe I

l

The principal objectives which support our national
interests are: I

1. To maintain the security of our nation and our alli l
The United States, in cooperation with its allies, mus I
seek to deter any aggression that could threaten that l
security, and, should deterrence fail, must be prepare

to repel or defeat any military attack and end the
conflict on terms favorable to the United States,’ its
interests, and its allies.

I To deter hostile attack of the United States, its
citizens, military forces, or allies and to defeat attac
if deterrence fails. ,
I To maintain the strength and vitality of U.S. alliance 
relationships.
To deal effectively with threats to the security of the
United States and its citizens short of armed conflic
including the threat of international terrorism.
- To prevent the spread of nuclear weapons.
0 To reduce over the long term our reliance on nuclea
weapons by strengthening our conventional forces,
pursuing equitable and verifiable arms control
agreements, and developing technologies for
strategic defense.
To assure unimpeded U.S. access to the oceans and
space.

0 To prevent the domination of the Eurasian landmass
by the USSR (or any other hostile power, or
coalition of powers).

0 To force the Soviet Union to bear the brunt of its
domestic economic shortcomings in order to
discourage excessive Soviet military expenditures
and global adventurism.

0 To foster closer relations with the People's Republic
of China.

Specifical ly: l
l

 

2. To respond to the challenges of the global economy.
Economic interdependence has brought tremendous
benefits to the United States, but alsolpresents new
policy problems which must be resolved. Since our
resourcedependence has grown, the potential
vulnerability of our supply lines is an issue of concern.
Although continuing U.S. economic growth is helping
lift the world out of recession, economic slowdown
continues in many countries. We must devote
attention to critical global problems, which if
unresolved or unattended, may affect U.S. interests in
the future. Many of these problems such as Third
World debt, the international narcotics trade, and
growing protectionism are currently having an impact
on U.S. interests.

Specifically:

0 To promote a strong, prosperous and competitive
U.S. economy, in the context of a stable and growing
world economy.

0 To ensure U.S. access to foreign markets, and to
ensure the United States and its allies and friends
access to foreign energy and mineral resources.

I To promote a well-functioning international
economic system with minimal distortions to trade
and investment, stable currencies, and broadly
agreed and respected rules for managing and
resolving differences.

3. To defend and advance the cause of democracy,

freedom, and human rights throughout the world. A

foreign policy that ignored the fate of millions around
the world who seek freedom would be a betrayal of
our national heritage. Our own freedom, and that of
our allies, could never be secure in a world where
freedom was threatened everywhere else.

Specifically:
0 To promote the growth of national independence
and free institutions throughout the world.

0 To encourage and support aid, trade, and
investment programs that promote economic
development and the growth of free and humane
social and political orders in the Third World.

0 To encourage liberalizing tendencies within the
Soviet Union and its client states.

 

4. To resolve peacefully disputes which affect U.S.
interests in troubled regions of the world. Regional
conflicts which involve allies or friends of the United
States may threaten U.S. interests, and frequently carry
the risk of escalation to a wider conflict. Conflicts, or
attempts to subvert friendly governments, which are
instigated or supported by the Soviets and their client
states, represent a particularly serious threat to U.S.
interests.

Specifically:

0 To maintain stable global and regional military
balances vis-a-vis the USSR and states aligned with it.

0 To aid threatened states in resisting Soviet or Soviet-
sponsored subversion or aggression.

0 To eliminate, where possible, the root causes of
regional instabilities which create the or risk of
major war.

0 To neutralize the efforts of the Soviet Union to
increase its influence in the world and weaken the
links between the USSR and its client states in th
Third World. ’~

- To aid in combatting threats to the stability of
friendly governments and institutions from
insurgencies, state-sponsored terrorism and the
international trafficking of illicit drugs.

5. To build effective and favorable relationships with all
nations with whom there is a basis of shared concern.
In the world today, there are over 150 nations. Not one
of them is the equal of the United States in total power
or wealth, but each is sovereign, and most, if not all,
touch U.S. interests directly or indirectly.

Specifically:

0 To support the formation of associations of states
friendly to U.S. interests using the full range of
diplomatic, political, economic, and informational
efforts.

0 To make major international institutions more
effective in promoting peace, world order and
political, economic and social progress.

0 To explore the possibility of improved relations with
those nations hostile to us in order to reduce the
chance of future conflict.

0 To strengthen U.S. influence throughout the world.

5

 

 

Our National Security Strategy must be resolute in
supporting U.S. interests and objectives. It must also
take into account the many threats and instabilities of
today's complex and changing world.

PRINCIPAL THREATS TO
U.S. INTERESTS

The most significant threat to U.S. security and national
interests is the global challenge posed by the Soviet
Union. While only a handful of people in the Politburo
can claim with any confidence to know the Krem|in’s
precise near-term, tactical plans, the long-term strategic
direction of Soviet foreign policy is clearer. Motivated
by the demands of a political system held together and
dominated by Marxist-Leninist ideology and the
political party which represents it, Moscow seeks to
alter the existing international system and establish
Soviet global hegemony. These long-range Soviet
objectives constitute the overall conceptual framework
of Soviet foreign and defense policy.

Fundamental differences in economic, social, and
political beliefs and objectives lead to an essentially
adversarial relationship between the United States and
the Soviet Union. The two sides nevertheless share the
common goal of avoiding direct confrontation and
reducing the threat of nuclear war. The real challenge
for American statecraft is how best to realize this
commonality of interests, so as to preserve peace,
without jeopardizing our national security or
abandoning our commitment to the cause of freedom
and justice.

To execute its expansionist policies, the USSR has
perpetuated a domestic political system of centralized
totalitarian control and mobilized and organized this
system to support its international objectives.
Internationally, the Soviets have continued to assist
groups waging so-called wars of “national liberation,”
sponsor with arms and military training international
terrorist groups, promote and exploit regional
instabilities and conduct an aggressive and illegal war
in Afghanistan. In numerous other places around the
globe, Soviet advisors and combat troops have also

6

engaged in conduct in violation of international
agreements.

The Soviets have undertaken an unprecedented milita.
buildup that poses a continuing threat to the United
States and our allies.’ The Soviet leadership clearly
attaches the greatest importance to its military strengtl
which has been the most signiﬁcant source of the
USSR’s influence on the international scene. For
decades the Soviet Union has allocated a
disproportionate percentage of national income to the
buildup of its military forces. It now has a uniformed
military of more than five million (excluding more that
one million border guards and other security forces). It
is estimated that military expenditures currently absorb
15-17 percent of the total Soviet GNP.

Soviet military power permits Moscow to provide a
strong defense of the homeland while facilitating direct
and indirect participation in regional conflicts beyond
Soviet borders. Furthermore, Soviet military resources
increasingly are used to influence and broker the
policies of other countries and to promote instability.

The evidence of the relationship between the Soviet
Union and the growth of worldwide terrorism is now
conclusive. Even though the Soviet Union does not
have direct control over most of the terrorist groups, it
supplies massive amounts of arms, money, and
advisory assistance to revolutionary forces engaged in
terrorist activities. The Soviets attempt to disguise such
support by using middle men——radical governments
such as Cuba, North Korea, Nicaragua, Syria, and
Libya, which deal directly with radical terrorists and
insurgents. Whether Moscow is providing support
directly or indirectly, the ultimate targets of radical
terrorism are the United States, Western Europe, Japan,
and other moderate, pro-\Nestern governments.

The Soviet Union in recent years has become much
more sophisticated in wielding the instruments of
national power. Despite significant weaknesses in the
Soviet economy, the Politburo actively employs
economic instruments in its global strategy. It uses
trade with the West to obtain economic leverage,

‘ technology, and foreign exchange. The acquisition of

military-related advanced technology through legal and

l
l

 

illegal means, is especially important to the Soviets, to
shorten weapon development times, reduce costs, and
to compensate for the weakness of the Soviet economy.
Acquisition of production technology is equally
important to the Soviets, to improve the efficiency of
their defense industry. Access to Western manufacturing
equipment, processes, and know-how has enabled
Soviet defense plants to introduce some advanced
weapons into production up to five years earlier than
would have been othenIvise possible. The Soviets also
attempt to obtain long-term economic agreements
which build relationships of dependency on the USSR
(e.g., those relating to the supply of energy resources to
Western Europe).

In addition, the Soviets have established a massive
political influence apparatus. This apparatus includes
the world’s largest propaganda machine, incorporating
overt and clandestine activities in all types of media;
funding and support of foreign communist parties and
front organizations; political and ideological
indoctrination of foreign students, government officials,
terrorists, and military personnel; and perceptions
management of foreign visitors to the USSR. It includes
separate efforts to conduct “active measures,” including
disinformation, forgeries, the use of political agents of
influence, and other deceptive operations.

While the Soviets cannot be branded as instigators of
all revolutionary movements, their strategy clearly is to
exploit domestic vulnerabilities in foreign countries to
promote the emergence of regimes under Soviet
influence or control. All this is accomplished under the
rubric of ”peaceful coexistence” with the United States
and the West, defined as a continuing contest in which
all forms of struggle are permissible short of all-out war.

   

While we remain properly concerned with the Soviet
threat, we must not neglect other destabilizing
international threats and problems which can seriously
damage U.S. interests if not properly addressed. These
include non-communist nations with oppressive
governments and ideologies opposed to ours;
international economic concerns of massive world
debt, trade imbalances, and shifts in comparative
advantage in our interdependent global economic
system; the global population explosion and related
food, water, and poverty problems; the proliferation of
nuclear weapons; drug trafficking; and human rights
violations, to name only a few.

An additional threat, which is particularly insidious in
nature and growing in scope, is international
terrorism—a worldwide phenomenon that is becoming
increasingly frequent, indiscriminate, and state-
supported. Terrorism is likely to be a prominent feature
of the international landscape for the remainder of this
century. It directly attacks our democratic values,
undermines our diplomatic efforts for peaceful
solutions to conflicts, and erodes the foundations of
civilized societies. Effectively countering terrorism is a
major national security objective of the United States.

A solid understanding of our national interests and
objectives, against the backdrop of major threats to
those interests, is essential to devising sound strategies.
The next two chapters will discuss the principal
elements of our foreign and defense policies, and the
ways in which they contribute to the achievement of
national security objectives. The effective integration of
our foreign and defense policies provides the
foundation for our National Security Strategy.

   

 

Ill. U.S. Foreign Policy

CONTINUITY OF
BASIC GOALS

Our foreign policy reflects the basic thrust of our
National Security Strategy—the promotion of our
democratic way of life. History has shown us
repeatedly that only in democracies is there inherent
respect for individual liberties and rights. In the
postwar world, democracies have also exhibited
extraordinary economic vitality. With their more
flexible economies, democracies have continued to
demonstrate the efficiency and dynamism necessary to
maintain strength in a complex and difficult
international economic environment.

If we are to achieve the kind of world we all hope to
see, democracy must continue to prosper and expand.
Today, in a number of countries in varying stages of
economic development, democracy is growing
stronger. The United States must be a beacon for
democracy. Unfortunately, many in the world are
prevented from seeing our beacon. For many more, it
has been distorted; and still others, who are able to see
it and are inspired by it, need help in the form of
practical assistance.

We have provided assistance before—in postwar
Western Etlrope and Asia——and we must again. What
we helped achieve in those areas constitutes one of the
most remarkable, positive chapters of recent history.
Our support for democracy should not be hidden; it
must be active and visible. Active support of
democratic forces in the past two decades has
demonstrated the value of this legitimate and important
activity. The substantial support provided by West

European democratic parties significantly aided
the successful drives of democratic movements in
Spain and Portugal.

We are interested in assisting constructive change
which can lead to greater political stability, social
justice, and economic progress. Change must come
from within, following a path dictated by national and
local traditions. In some instances; assistance and
guidance is better provided by other democracies or
multilaterally. Patience, respect for different cultures

and recognition of our own limitations must guide our ~~

effort.

INSTRUMENTS OF
FOREIGN POLICY

The United States has an exceptionally diverse array of
tools for protecting its international interests and for
supporting the drive toward democracy across the
globe. It is possible that no other nation has ever been
comparably endowed. These instruments are normally
most effective when used in concert with others. All of
them must be adapted to changing situations. The
resurgence of our national strength in this decade has
been broadly based. It will endure into the next decade
only if we protect this base and ensure that the tools
available to us are properly sustained and effectively
used. The separate, but interrelated tools on which the
success of our foreign policy depends are:

Moral and political example. American spirit and
prosperity represents a critical challenge to the

ideology and the practical record of our adversaries:
free, pluralist societies work. This power of example
represents a potent advantage of American society, but
we should not leave its expression to chance. It is in
our interest to spread this message in an organized
way.

Military strength and economic vitality. A strong U.S.
military capability is essential to maintaining the stable,
secure environment in which diplomacy can be
effective and our adversaries are deterred. America’s
economic power sustains this strength and fortifies our
relations with the other countries that share our interest
in a free and open international order.

Alliance relationships. The pursuit of American goals
depends on cooperation with like-minded international
partners. This relationship enhances our strength and
mitigates the understandable reluctance of the
American people to shoulder security burdens alone.
The predictable difficulties that arise from time to time
in all alliance relationships must be measured against
the enormous value that these ties bring us and our
friends.

Security assistance. By helping friends, allies, and
those targeted by our adversaries acquire the means to
defend themselves, we limit the potential of our own
involvement in dangerous conflicts. Security assistance
abroad is productive investment in our own security. It
aids deterrence, promotes regional stability, helps to
ensure access to vital overseas military facilities, and
lessens our own military requirements. Resolute use of
this valuable foreign policy tool directly promotes our
security interests.

Economic assistance. In the decades since World War II,
America has contributed nearly $200 billion to the
economic development of other countries. These
financial resources have played a vital role in ensuring
critical U.S. objectives are met. A well structured
economic assistance program provides essential
support for our world leadership position.

Trade policy. The impact of economic assistance is
maximized when it is matched by a sound trade policy
that facilitates the best use of our assistance. Moreover,
a trade policy that aggravates the economic difficulties
of others may only increase the need for future

10

   

American assistance. Adherence to the principles of an
open and fair world trading order ensures that
countries acquire the economic strength to stand on
their own feet, and contributes to our own well—being
through mutually beneficial trade. Security
considerations will sometimes require restrained trade
and allied cooperation to prevent enhancing the
military capabilities of our adversaries.

Science and Technology Cooperation. For most
countries, access to advanced scientific and
technological resources is critical to prosperity and
long-term economic growth. U.S. world leadership and
vast resources in science and technology constitute
important strategic assets to strengthen existing ties
with friends and allies, and promote positive
relationships with emerging nations.

Private investment in developing economies. The free
flow of international investment is as central to global
economic growth as an open trading order. U.S. private
investment in less developed countries contributes
significantly to their economic growth and promotes
social stability. At a time when developing countries
are striving to meet their debt-servicing obligations and
the resources of our national budget are under
pressure, the contribution of private«sector investment
assumes increased importance.

Diplomatic mediation. In regions where conflict
threatens our interests and those of our friends,
political efforts are essential to ending violence,
promoting freedom and national self-determination,
and laying the foundations for future stability. The
initiatives of American diplomacy take their strength
from effective and integrated use of the other tools
already discussed, and from the ability of U.S.
representatives to act credibly as mediators of disputes.
Making clear the firmness of our commitments to
friends and allies will, in fact, increase the incentives of
their adversaries to negotiate seriously.

International Organizations. Multilateral diplomacy
and participation in international organizations provide
an opportunity to address common global problems
and share the task of solving them. Skillful U.S.
diplomacy within these organizations has served to
enhance our overall goals on issues such as

peacekeeping, promotion of human rights, and
encouraging the development of free economic and
political systems.

Support for Freedom Fighters. The tools of foreign
policy must encompass the special needs of those who
resist the Soviet-style regimes implanted in Third World
countries in the 1970's and 1980's. America has a long
history of private and government support to groups
seeking national independence and freedom. This is a
vital and important effort, as aggressive Marxist-Leninist
regimes clearly threaten international peace and
stability. We seek to advance the cause of freedom and
democracy, and to demonstrate to the Soviets that their
actions aimed at spreading Marxist-Leninist
totalitarianism will bring them no enduring gain.

INTERNATIONAL
ECONOMIC POLICY

The United States supports market-oriented policies
that foster economic growth, both domestically and
internationally. The economic growth of the United
States is the cornerstone that ensures our strength and
permits human potential to flourish. Our policies of
economic growth have provided the underlying base of
support for the most important element in our National
Security Strategy in the past six years—the revitalization
of U.S. military power. The dynamic growth of the U.S.
economy is the envy of much of the world. We are
now working in this country to rebuild American
productivity, sustain our scientific and technological
leadership, make the most of our human potential, and
move into the 21st century with an even more efficient,
capable and competitive American economy. Our
nation will achieve these goals with hard work,
determination, and a commitment to the revitalization
of American industry.

The United States places reliance on private enterprise
and initiative. This philosophy leads to higher living
standards and concern for the economic advancement
of the individual. Our National Security Strategy in the
international economic area seeks to support and
promote market-oriented economic policies which will
maximize economic opportunity and individual
welfare.

It is important to understand why we stress private
enterprise as the basis of our international economic
policy. This is one of the prime areas in which the
United States—and the free world general|y—differ in
all respects from the communist world. The Soviet
economic model is characterized by the ineffectiveness
of the centralized command economy, the failure of
collective enterprises, and the inability to provide
adequate standards of living for the mass of Soviet
citizens. The Soviet model of economic organization
does‘ not work and will not work.

Under the leadership of General Secretary Gorbachev,
the Soviet Union has announced that it is attempting
fundamental reforms in the management of economic
policy. Recently, Gorbachev invited the Western private
sector, and U.S. business leaders in particular, to
develop a long-term stake in the future of the Soviet
economy. In light of this Soviet initiative, we need to
ask ourselves what kind of Soviet Union we wish to see
in the next twenty or thirty years. Clearly, we can affect
the outcome only at the margin. But we should‘ not“
ignore new opportunities for increasing economic

interaction between our two societies. Greater -

economic freedom for the Soviet people is in the
interest of the West as long as it does not foster greater
Soviet investment in military capability.

But we must approach such interaction with a sense of
realism. There are some areas where it would clearly
not serve constructive purposes. Soviet membership in
the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), for
example, would not be in the best interests of the West
at present. In addition to the danger of GATT
politicization, the USSR’s state-directed trading system
is fundamentally incompatible with the free-market
orientation of the GATT international trading system.
Suggestions by Soviet officials about possible USSR
membership in the World Bank or International
Monetary Fund should be treated with caution for
similar reasons. We would oppose such membership
under present circumstances.

The USSR’s effort to broaden its foreign economic
relations forms an integral part of Soviet national
security strategy. In addition to aiding the Soviet
economy, it is designed to exploit dependence of
trading partners and enhance Soviet power and

11

influence generally. Trade with the West can also
provide access to advanced technology which
facilitates the Soviet military buildup. Non—communist
governments need to display greater discipline in
weaving security considerations into the fabric of East-
West commercial relations.

Specifically:

' As recognized in the Helsinki Accords, government-
to—government cooperation in the economic sphere
should be dependent on progress in other areas of
East-VVest relations, including Eastern observance of
human rights.

U COCOM controls on strategic technologies should
be maintained, streamlined and enforced to restrain
the ability of the Soviet Union and its allies to match
or overtake Western defense capabilities.

0 The International Energy Agency (lEA) should
continue its efforts to reduce dependence among
member countries on insecure energy supplies.

Early in our Administration, we laid the international
economic groundwork for greater cooperation with our
allies. We have attempted to foster the view that the
future belongs to those who allow free enterprise to
guide economic decisions and not to those regimes
which allow bureaucratic functionaries to set the
course of economic development. Throughout these six
years, we have witnessed these principles move from
concept into reality. In France, economic liberalization
is steadily progressing. In Japan, slowly but surely, trade
and capital markets are being opened. In Germany and
the United Kingdom, new economic courses are being
set to sustain growth with low inflation.

We believe that market-oriented policies are key to
greater growth in America and throughout the world

over the long-term. We have worked diligently to resist

protectionist tendencies both at home and abroad,
since protectionism will harm all free nations.
Immediate as well as long term costs would more than
offset any short-term benefits which might be gained.

12

We have encouraged market-based energy policies and
more open energy trade within the International Energy
Agency. We have been the prime movers in laying the
groundwork for a new round of negotiations in the
GATT that will open markets for our exports of goods
and services and stimulate greater growth, efficiency
and worldwide job opportunities. We have forged
stronger ties with our Asian partners by emphasizing
the future role of U.S.-Pacific economic relations.

The industrial nations of the West have become
increasingly interdependent. None of these countries
acting alone can effectively resolve long-term economic
problems. The United States and its allies must work
together if we, and the rest of the world, are to prosper
and grow.

Enhancing world economic growth, opening markets,
and ameliorating the developing country debt situation
are long-term goals that can be met: only through
sound economic policies, prudent lending, and direct
investment and aid strategies that will elicit the broad
economic development and growing markets needed to
sustain long-term prosperity. Significant contributions of
capital and know-how through aid, investment,
technology transfer and training are as much an
ingredient of regional peace and collective security as
are deterrent forces and defense alliances. This
redefinition of the traditional concept of
”burdensharing" is in keeping with the capabilities of
the United States and our allies and the evolving
responsibilities of shared leadership.

In short, our international economic policy is built
around the belief that economic freedom is not the
sole possession of a chosen few, but the universal right
of all people. We will use our economic power and
political will to preserve and nurture our vision of the
world's economic future, which belongs to free people,
free governments and free economic enterprises.

POLITICAL AND
INFORMATIONAL ELEMENTS
OF NATIONAL POWER

We are faced with a profound challenge to our national
security in the political field. This challenge is to fight
the war of ideas and to help support the political
infrastructure of world democracies. To accomplish this
we must be as committed to the maintenance of our
political defense as we are to our military defense.

Public opinion polls consistently find that two-thirds of
the American electorate normally take no interest in
foreign policy. Moreover, only a bare majority today
believes that this country needs to play an active part
in world affairs—and that majority is eroding. There is
no natural domestic constituency for foreign policy-
we must build one. -

The instruments to implement such an approach
include a number of traditional foreign policy agencies
such as the Departments of State and Defense, Agency
for International Development (AID), and U.S.
Information Agency (USIA), plus several less traditional
participants including the Departments of Commerce
and Treasury, and the U.S. Trade Representative (USTR).

Another actor in the field of political, informational
and communications activity is the private sector.
During the past six years, the private sector has been
energized as a key element in the projection of U.S.
foreign policy goals. Leading private citizens and
groups are taking steps to identify and organize the
many local forces throughout the United States that
have a direct stake in the nation's relations with the rest
of the world. The private voluntary organizations in
world affairs are doing an indispensible job of public
education. They have our strongest encouragement and
support.

While we focus on the needs of an effective political
and informational policy, we must keep in mind that
the Soviet Union has a most aggressive public

deception and propaganda program, using a wide
range of techniques aimed not only at the Third World,
but also at our alliance partners. The current Soviet
regime has increased the range and intensity of Soviet
public diplomacy and propaganda efforts. We must
actively counter Soviet propaganda and active
measures using the full range of U.S. informational
programs.

Our political and informational strategy must also
reach to the peoples of denied areas, particularly the
USSR and Eastern Europe—to encourage hope for
change and to educate publics on the benefits of free
institutions. This is achieved through the electronic
media, written materials, and the increased contact and
exchange of ideas that come from such contact. The
process of gradual change will take place inside, but
the stimulant and the vision of "how things could be"
must come from outside in a closed society. This is the
vision of a nation which believes that a world of
democracies is a safer world, and one where the
respect for the dignity of all men has a better chance to
be realized.

REGIONAL POLICIES

Western Hemisphere. The defense of North America is
the nation's most fundamental security concern. Since
the Second World War this has entailed a hemispheric
security system, composed of a strong U.S. nuclear
deterrent, greater cooperation with Canada, and the
promotion of collective security arrangements with
Latin America. New threats and new opportunities for
democracy in the Western Hemisphere require that this
traditional approach be revitalized by building on the
interests we share with our democratic Caribbean,
North, Central and South American neighbors.

Aggressive Marxist regimes in Cuba and Nicaragua
have made the Western Hemisphere, once considered
indisputably secure for the United States, an area of
strategic opportunity for the Soviet Union. The fragility
of social and political arrangements in Latin America
and the presence of these two Soviet client states, with
their support for guerrilla movements in other Latin
nations and their ties to international terrorism,

13

   

promise continued instability and conflict in the
region. This situation is compounded by continuing
economic and debt-servicing problems, the ongoing
problem of the drug trade and the growing political
strength of the drug traffickers who—often in collusion
with local guerrilla groups-have begun to pose serious
challenges for the reborn Latin democracies.

U.S. national security policy for the Western
Hemisphere seeks to address these problems within the
broader framework of the promotion of democracy,
fostering economic development, strengthening
dialogue and diplomacy within and among area
countries, and contributing to defensive capabilities
that allow progress without debilitating external
interference. Many of the current challenges for the
United States fall outside of the formal collective
security arrangements created in previous decades. Our
national security requires an emphasis on political and
economic support for the hemispheres democracies
and diplomatic initiatives to strengthen alliances.

Western Europe. The security of Western Europe
constitutes a vital interest of the United States. Shared
values, the Soviet threat, and U.S.-European economic
interdependence underscore the importance of
collective defense epitomized by NATO.

The two greatest dangers to Western Europe's security
today are the proximity of massive Soviet conventional
and nuclear forces, and the vulnerability of Western
Europefs oil supply, some 60 percent of which moves
by sea from the Persian Gulf.

The cohesion of the NATO Alliance remains strong in
the face of these challenges, and is reinforced by an
intensive process of consultation on the full range of
security issues. Over the past twelve months, there have
been almost thirty high—level consultations at NATO.
This intense process, to which we remain fully
committed, has contributed to the fundamental
Alliance consensus on its approach to East-West
relations on issues ranging from arms control to human
rights. The common Alliance approach, set forth in
recent NATO Ministerial communiques,

combines a commitment to preserving the strength

14

   

necessary to defend our vital interests with a readiness
to work toward improved relations through a realistic
dialogue with the Soviet Union.

The Alliance has been measurably strengthened in
recent years. The United States has devoted special
attention to rebuilding its Alliance relationships, and
our efforts to reinvigorate the American economy have
provided a major impetus for growth in Western
Europe. Other milestones include the Spanish entry
into NATO in 1982 and last yeafs Spanish referendum
in support of continued membership. Through its 1983
and subsequent Intermediate-range Nuclear Force (INF)
deployments, the Alliance demonstrated its resolve to
protect its basic interests in the face of Soviet
intimidation. In 1984, the Allies launched a program to
improve conventional defense capabilities, and more
recently have focused increased attention on
armaments cooperation. In 1985-86, Allied firmness
and solidarity helped to bring the Soviets back to the
negotiating table in Geneva and to promote progress in
the talks themselves.

Despite the basic vigor and strength of the Atlantic
Alliance, NATO relationships have come under strain
from several quarters. The challenges include, for
example, protectionism and trade deficits, different
methods of dealing with terrorism, burdensharing, and
at times, differing assessments of the Soviet threat.
Moreover, the foreign policy priorities of Western
European governments with respect to developments in
Asia, Africa, the Middle East and Latin America do not
always coincide with U.S. priorities, in part because the
United States must adopt a global outlook.

Doubts have sometimes been expressed, especially in
the late 1970's, over the continued validity of the U.S.
commitment to Europe's defense. The successful
implementation of NATO’s 1979 INF dual-track decision
thwarted the most recent Soviet attempt to decouple
the U.S. security guarantee from the defense of Europe,
and has served as a major incentive for the Soviets to
engage in serious negotiations for real reductions in
intermediate—range nuclear forces. Whatever the
outcome of the INF negotiations, flexible response will
require the continuing presence of U.S. nuclear
weapons in Europe. Nonetheless, NATO has

 

 

consistently worked to keep its nuclear arsenal at the
minimum level necessary for deterrence and is
proceeding with the reductions in its stockpile
mandated by the 1983 Montebello decision.

The challenge before us is to maintain the momentum
we have achieved and continue to manage the
inevitable strains in our Alliance relationships. With a
common commitment to the values and interests
which constitute the bedrock of the Alliance,
imagination, and political courage, the United States
and its Allies will succeed in building an even stronger
bulwark against Soviet aggression and intimidation.

East Asia and Pacific. The United States is a Pacific
power and a proud member of the area of the globe
that has led the world's economies in growth. Soviet
military power in Asia and the Pacific has grown
dramatically, but the U.S. response goes far beyond
technical issues of relative military power. The goal is
to strengthen our natural political and economic
associations, while proceeding steadily with necessary
modernization of our military forces deployed in the
area.

Cooperation with Japan is basic to U.S. relationships in
the region. The U.S.-Japan Mutual Security Treaty
formalizes our defense ties, providing a security
foundation for the broad spectrum of economic, social
and political associations which join us.

In the security area, Japan's recent redefinition of its
self-defense goals—especia|ly as that relate to sea lane
protection—is of particular importance. Japanese forces
are developing capabilities that can make a significant
contribution to deterrence. At the same time, Japan's
defense spending remains small as a share of its huge
economy, and more rapid progress is needed toward
Japan's defense goals. But the constant and substantial
growth of that spending over the last fifteen years, and
particularly over the last five years, is significant. Japan's
recent decision to spend more than one percent of its
GNP on defense is especially noteworthy.

Japan is now the world's second greatest economic
power. This development is reflected in increased
Japanese expenditures on foreign assistance, which it
continues to target on key strategic countries. At the

   

 

same time, Japanese economic relations have become
a source of political tension. The Japanese trade
surplus is the biggest in history. This surplus cannot be
sustained and must be brought into better balance. We
are working together on many fronts to do this.

Our alliance with the Republic of Korea remains of
exceptional importance. North Korea still has armed
forces that far exceed those of the South in quantity, are
newly strengthened by additional Soviet weapons, and
are in the hands of a government whose aggressive
demeanor and tendency to act unexpectedly is well
known. Our own military presence in the Republic of
Korea is of importance, both for regional stability and
for local security, which is essential to that country's
remarkable economic development. It now faces a
critical period of political development as well, as it
moves toward a first-ever peaceful change of
government when President Chun’s term will be
completed in 1988. In this process, the United States
hopes to use its influence to encourage Koreans in this
democratic change. We do so, however; in careful ways
that respect Korean traditions and political realities, and
are mindful of the constant security threat.

China's importance speaks for itself. Its attainment of
rapid economic growth, while simultaneously making
basic economic, social and political changes, is
another great achievement in its remarkable history.
The United States seeks a close, friendly, and
cooperative relationship with the People's Republic of
China, outside any alliance, and without any illusions
that one is a political or strategic “card” for the other.
Simply put, both of us recognize the importance of
each to the other in the many shared areas of
agreement, even as we appreciate the diversity of our
political systems.

In the Philippines, the new government faces major
and inherited political, security and economic
challenges. Through all of the tools available to us, we
are determined to help this key Pacific ally to overcome
these problems so it can once again achieve economic
growth, counter the threat of a serious insurgency and
strengthen democratic government.

Our second treaty ally in Southeast Asia, Thailand, is
the ASEAN frontline state bordering Cambodia, now

15

 

 

 

occupied by the Vietnamese and the site of an active
Cambodian resistance coalition struggling to gain self-
determination for the Khmer people. In support of
Thailand, which also shoulders the major refugee
burden in Southeast Asia, we will continue our close
security cooperation to deter any potential aggression
and maintain our support of eligible refugees. We will
also continue our cooperative effort with‘Thailand to
suppress narcotic trafficking.

The United States views the continued occupation of
Cambodia by Vietnamese forces as unacceptable as it
undermines regional efforts towards development,
peace and stability. We also oppose the return of the
Khmer Rouge to power in Cambodia. We will continue
our strong support of ASEAN’s quest for a peaceful
political solution and for the non-Communist elements
of the resistance coalition. Under our initiative on
regional problems at the United Nations, we are
prepared to play a constructive role in the context of a
Cambodian settlement.

Despite acute and serious differences with Vietnam,
through bilateral discussions we have made more
progress in accounting for our missing servicemen in
the past two years than at any time since the end of the
war. Similarly, our bilateral discussions on the
humanitarian question of refugees, reeducation of
internees and Amerasians will continue with the
objective of a humane solution to these complex
questions. We will not, however, resume normalization
of relations with Vietnam until Hanoi agrees to a
Cambodian settlement involving withdrawal of its
occupation forces.

We have seen a modest but welcome improvement in
relations between Laos and the United States. Our
primary measure of their sincerity to improve relations
is further, accelerated, cooperative efforts to account for
our servicemen still missing.

In the South Pacific, our longstanding alliance with
Australia under the ANZUS Treaty remains the keystone
of our foreign policy in the area. The United States has
been especially aware of the needs of the South Pacific
independent states. We recently reached agreement on
the key elements of an historic fisheries treaty. We are
pleased with this agreement which creates a solid

16

 

foundation for future friendship and cooperation. We
believe that the package of U.S. assistance that is linked
to the treaty will encourage development of the island
economies. We also were recently able to celebrate the
creation of a new U.S. Commonwealth —The Northern
Marianas~and two new freely associated states, the
Federated States of Micronesia and the Republic of the
Marshalls. We welcome these new participants to the
Pacific Ocean community.

The Soviet Union and Eastern Europe. As mentioned
earlier, the most significant threat to U.S. security and
national interests is the global challenge posed by the
Soviet Union. There is no doubt that Moscow aspires
to alter the existing international system and establish
Soviet global hegemony. These Soviet long-range
objectives are underwritten by Soviet concepts of
foreign and defense policy. Our policy for dealing with
the Soviets rests on three guiding principles:

0 Realism, which means that we must recognize the
nature of the Soviet system and deal frankly and
forthrightly with problems in our relationship.

0 Strength, which is more than military power, but
includes political determination, the strength of
alliances, and economic health as well. The Soviet
Union respects strength and takes advantage of
weakness.

0 Dialogue, which means that we are prepared to
discuss all the issues that divide us, and are ready
to work for practical and fair solutions on a basis
compatible with our own fundamental interests.

Consistent with this approach, we are engaged in
dialogues with the Soviets on four basic elements of
our relationship: human rights; the reduction of
regional conflicts; areas of mutually beneficial
cooperation; and arms control. In all areas, progress is
slow.

At the same time, through coordinated employment of
many elements of our national power, we seek to deter
further Soviet direct and indirect aggression, and
achieve a lessened Soviet reliance on the use or threat
of force. We will continue to counter Soviet
expansionism worldwide. No additional country has
fallen to Soviet aggression since 1981, and the Soviets

 

have been more cautious in undertaking new military
adventures in recent years, though they and their
proxies remain active in such areas as Afghanistan,
Angola, Cambodia, and Nicaragua.

In short, we have put in place a policy designed for

long-term management of U.S.-Soviet relations in order
to pursue our interests without the rapid fluctuations or
unrealistic illusions which characterized some periods
in the-past. The fundamental fact is that the U.S.-Soviet
relationship is essentially adversarial, and will remain
so for the foreseeable future. But both sides agree that
we have a responsibility to ensure that this relationship
remains peaceful. We are ready for the long effort and
steady course required to pursue our national interests
in this fashion.

The United States has important political and
economic interests in Eastern Europe. We have never
recognized the division of Europe as either lawful or
permanent. There was no agreement at Yalta to divide
Europe into ”spheres of influence." Rather, the Soviet
Union pledged itself to grant full independence to
Poland and to other states in Eastern Europe and to
hold free elections. Soviet failure to honor these
commitments is one of the primary causes of East-West
tensions today. Our policy toward Eastern Europe seeks
to promote a positive role for Eastern European states
in preserving European stability and exercising a
moderating influence on the Soviet Union.

We believe the United States should deal with the East
European countries on an individual basis and vary our
policies depending upon our assessment of the
conditions in each nation. In keeping with this
principle, we differentiate our policies toward Eastern
Europe to achieve a variety of objectives. These include
the encouragement of domestic liberalization and
more autonomous foreign policies; promotion of
security through enhanced economic and political
cooperation; and the fostering of genuine and long-
lasting improvement in human rights. Concurrently, we
seek to promote increased dialogue through cultural
and scientific exchanges, international forums, high-
level visits, bilateral councils and people-to-people
contacts.

 

The Middle East and South Asia. Our principal
interests in the Middle East include maintaining
regional stability, containing and reducing Soviet
influence, preserving the security of Israel and our
other friends in the area, retaining access to oil on
reasonable terms for ourselves and our allies, and
curbing state-sponsored terrorism. Those interests are
threatened by the continuation of the Iran-Iraq conﬂict,
the existence of deep-seated Arab-Israeli tensions, the
growth of anti-\IVestern political movements in the
region, and the use of terrorism as an instrument of
state policy, particularly by Libya, Syria, and Iran. Our
strategy in the region aims to safeguard our interests
from those threats; to hasten negotiated settlements of
the Palestinian problem and the Iran-Iraq war; to
bolster the security and economic well-being of Israel
and moderate Arab regimes; to help our friends in the
Gulf protect themselves and international shipping
lanes; and to isolate and deter state sponsors of
terrorism.

The U.S. Initiative of September 1982 remains the
cornerstone of our approach to the Arab-Israeli peace
process. Our immediate goal is direct negotiations
between Israel and a Jordanian-Palestinian delegation,
as part of a general effort to broaden the Egyptian-
Israeli peace and bring about a just and lasting
resolution of the Palestinian problem. We remain firmly
committed to a prompt and honorable negotiated
settlement of the Iran-Iraq war. Current Iranian behavior
poses a serious threat to our interests and those of our
friends in the region. Until Iran ceases its efforts to
prolong the senseless war with Iraq, we will work
actively to block the flow of arms and military material
to Iran.

Despite severe budgetary constraints, economic and
security assistance, together with a prudent but
responsive policy of arms sales within the region,
remains an essential part of our efforts to strengthen
Israel and moderate Arab regimes. We cannot afford to
neglect the real needs of our friends. At the same time,
we will continue to try to isolate and build interna-
tional pressure against state sponsors of terrorism. Our
recent actions against Libya were designed to
demonstrate the political, military and economic

17.

 

 

 

 
 

costs of supporting terrorism. While we have no
illusions about eradicating this menace easily or
quickly, we remain determined to combat it vigorously
in close cooperation with our friends and allies.

U.S. objectives in South Asia include reduction of
regional tensions; development of cooperative
relationships between South Asian countries;
prevention of nuclear proliferation; and restoration of
the freedom of the Afghan people.

U.S. policy also seeks a general improvement in
bilateral relations with all countries of the
subcontinent. Important elements have been improved
India-U.S. relations and U.S. encouragement of better
relations between India and Pakistan. A new six-year
assistance plan of $4 billion for Pakistan has been
proposed by this Administration and is vital to that
country’s ability to withstand strong pressures
generated by the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.
Pakistan is hosting nearly three million Afghan refugees
on its soil. The United States remains the largest donor
of humanitarian assistance to the refugees.

For the first time, the United States has established
substantially improved relations with both India and
Pakistan. This enables us to help support the regional
desire for peace, despite periodic crises in Indo-
Pakistani relations.

Africa. African issues demand increasing attention

18

   

because of the continent's extensive natural resources;
its growing role in international forums; the threat
posed to regional security by the escalating racial
conflict in South Africa; and Soviet, Libyan, East
European and Cuban adventurism throughout the
region. The challenges to democracy are especially
strong in Africa, and we remain concerned about the
widespread denial of basic human rights, whether by
Marxist-Leninst clients of the Soviet Union or through
apartheid in South Africa. The sources of conflict
within Africa are many: extreme poverty, great
disparities of wealth, ethnic frictions, unsettled borders,
and religion.

U.S. policy must strive to encourage economic
development and political stability in Africa. African
leaders have started to recognizethat statist solutions
are not the answer and are beginning to reform their
economies. We must work with other donor countries
and the multilateral institutions to reinforce this trend
toward economic policy reform and private sector
development.

Economic growth will contribute to, but also requires,
political stability. We must continue to encourage the
peaceful resolution of conflicts without foreign
intervention. Deteriorating economic conditions and
political instability have encouraged intervention by the
Soviets, their surrogates, the Cubans, and maverick
troublemakers like Libya.

 

IV. U.S. Defense Policy

INTRODUCTION

The Defense Policy of the United States requires
military forces that are organized, manned, trained, and
equipped to deter and, if necessary, defeat aggression
across the entire spectrum of potential conflict. Our
National Security Strategy, global objectives, and the
nature of the threat require that we be prepared to
defend our interests as far from North America as
possible. Accordingly, our strategy relies heavily on
forward deployment of combat-ready forces, reinforced
by strong alliance relationships. In support of those
relationships, we will continue to maintain in
peacetime major forward deployments of land, naval,
and air forces in Europe, the Atlantic and the Pacific;
and other deployments in the Western Hemisphere and
Indian Ocean. The overall size and composition of our
armed forces are strongly influenced by these
requirements.

The challenge we face is dynamic and complex. There
remains a significant imbalance of forces favoring the
Soviet Union in several important contingencies. In
addition, Third World states are increasingly armed
with modern and sophisticated military equipment.

Comprehensive and imaginative integration of U.S. and
allied military capabilities is required to reduce risks to
our national security. Since our political and social
heritage militates against raising and supporting large
forces in peacetime, we are impelled to seek security
in America's national genius for technological
innovation; the breadth and diversity of our national
economy; and alliance cooperation. The United States
must pursue strategies for competition with the Soviets
which emphasize our comparative advantages in these
areas.

   

The full range of U.S. military capabilities must be
suitably balanced among combat and support
elements, and contain an appropriate mix of active
duty and reserve components. The United States must
have specialized forces—ranging from those required
for nuclear deterrence to forces configured to deal with
terrorism; and must also have general purpose forces
capable of sustaining high intensity conflict, while
maintaining an effective capability for lesser
contingencies and special operations. At the same time,
we must balance defense priorities among the
competing needs of readiness, sustainability,
modernization, and force expansion.

U.S. military forces also must be supported by plans,
doctrines, and command relationships which provide
for effective integration and employment of all facets of
our military power. While the possible use of nuclear
weapons must remain an element in our overall
military strategy, nuclear forces should never be viewed
as simply a lower-cost alternative to conventional
forces. U.S. forces must be capable of rapid deployment
to deter wider crises or conflicts. They must also
possess the capability, should deterrence fail, to expand
the scope and intensity of combat operations, as
necessary, to terminate the conflict on terms favorable
to the United States and its allies.

The United States must maintain effective and robust
Reserve and National Guard forces, trained and
equipped at levels commensurate with their wartime
missions, as well as Coast Guard and other capabilities
which support the national security establishment. The
United States must also continue to enhance its
capabilities to surge or mobilize manpower and key
industrial resources, planning for the most effective use
of available strategic warning in the event of crisis or
war.

19

 

 

 

TAKING ADVANTAGE OF U.S.
STRENGTHS AND SOVIET
WEAKNESSES

One of the central tenets of our defense policy is that
the United States will not seek to match the Soviet
Union weapon for weapon. Rather, we will work to
overcome Soviet numerical superiority by taking
maximum advantage of the inherent strengths of
alliances composed of democratic, industrialized, free
economy nations.

Technology. The United States and its allies continue to
enjoy technological superiority over the Soviet Bloc in
most areas of military application. This technological
advantage deriwes from the fundamental nature of the
two societies. The spirit of inquiry and the free flow of
information which characterize the \Nest will inevitably
permit technology and innovation to flourish to a
greater degree than it will in a closed society. The
United States and its allies enjoy an intrinsic advantage
not only in the creation, but in the practical
exploitation of advanced technologies. Competitive,
free-enterprise societies consistently out-perform
centrally planned economies in fostering innovation,
growth, and the application of new technology to a
wide variety of fields.

Technology affects our national security in two ways.
First, the ability to exploit and adapt technology
contributes to the overall economic health of the
United States and its allies, which is a key element of
national power. Second, the exploitation of a
technological advantage directly enhances defense.
Precision guided munitions, for example, help offset
the large Soviet edge in tank forces. Stealth technology
helps counter the massive Soviet investment in air
defense. Advances in anti-submarine warfare
technologies and in submarine quieting help preserve
maritime superiority despite the Soviet Navy’s
numerical advantages. Perhaps most significantly, the
U.S. edge in computer technology and software has
military relevance across the entire spectrum of
warfare.

The Soviets are, of course, conscious of the Western
technological advantage and have undertaken a

20

 

   

massive effort to acquire and exploit Western
technology. Thus a vital element of our defense policy
is to control technology transfer and protect classified
information relating to military technologies. With this
in mind, we have undertaken a major effort to enhance
our National Counter-intelligence and Security
Countermeasures plans and capabilities, as I outlined
in my November 1986 report to Congress.

Competitive Strategies. Competitive strategies are
aimed at exploiting our technological advantages in
thoughtful and systematic ways to cause the Soviets to
compete less efficiently or less effectively in areas of
military application. Such strategies seek to make
portions of the tremendous Soviet military machine
obsolete and force the Soviets to divert resources in
ways they may not prefer, and in a manner that may not
necessarily threaten our own forces. Low observable
(stealth) technology, for example, can render much of
the Soviet investment in air defense obsolete and
requires the Soviets to divert resources from offensive
forces to defensive forces._The contribution which new
technologies can make to our competitive strategies is
an explicit consideration in making defense
procurement decisions.

Alliances. A third area of U.S. strength and Soviet
weakness is alliance relationships. While the Soviet
Union presides over an empire that has seen several
armed rebellions in the past forty years, the United
States is the leader of a voluntary coalition of equal
nations. U.S. allies, particularly our NATO partners,
contribute a major share of the West's total military
strength. Recognizing this contribution, our defense
policy is based on the fundamental premise that we
will not seek to offset Soviet power alone, but in
conjunction with our allies throughout the globe, on a
basis of equitable burdensharing.

In NATO, this means continuing our strong support for
Alliance efforts to improve the overall Western
conventional balance, including appropriate economic
and military assistance to allies on NATO’s critical
southern flank. It means integrating the contribution of
our NATO partners into our strategy—indeed, the
United States has no separate military strategy for the
defense of Europe, but is a partner in the NATO
alliance strategy of deterrence and defense. Outside of
Europe, the United States seeks strong ties with nations

 

throughout the globe, assisting friendly and allied
countries in improving their military capabilities while
encouraging them to assume a greater role in their own
defense.

The Strength of the Individual. One of our greatest
advantages in competing with the Soviet Union is the
character of our people. Western societies, with their
stress on the importance of the individual, stand in
sharp contrast to the repressive nature of the Soviet
state. The initiative, enterprise, and motivation of free
people is a source of great strength when individuals
are put to the supreme test of combat. While
intangible, these qualities are an important asset, which
the Soviets cannot match. Defense policy recognizes
this by stressing unit integrity and leadership, while our
traininghand tactics place great value on individual
initiative, and aggressive exploitation of opportunities.

MAINTENANCE OF A
STRATEGIC DETERRENT

Deterrence is the most fundamental element of our
defense policy and the cornerstone of our alliance
relationships. Deterrence must not only prevent
conventional and nuclear attack on the United States,
but must extend such protection to our allies.
Deterrence can best be achieved if our defense posture
makes the assessment of war outcome by the Soviets,
or any other adversary, so dangerous and uncertain as
to remove any possible incentive for initiating conflict.
Deterrence depends both on nuclear and conventional
capabilities, and on evidence of a strong will to use
military force, if necessary, to defend our vital interests.

While deterrence requires capabilities across the entire
spectrum of conflict, its essential foundation is
provided by our strategic nuclear forces and the
doctrine which supports them. Nuclear deterrence, like
any form of deterrence, requires us to consider not
what would deter us, but what would deter the Soviets,
whose perceptions of the world and value system are
substantially different from our own. Since we can
never be entirely certain of Soviet perceptions, it is of
the utmost importance that the effectiveness of our

strategic capabilities—and our will to use them, if
necessary— never be in doubt.

In the interest of ensuring deterrence, the United States
maintains diversified strategic forces to hedge against a
disarming first strike, complicate Soviet attack plans,
and guard against technological surprise which might
threaten one element of our strategic forces. To this
end, we maintain a variety of basing modes, launch
platforms, and attack vehicles, achieving diversity
through a triad of SLBMs, lCBMs and bombers.
Adequate and survivable command and control is an
essential element of strategic force structure, and is
critical to the credibility of our strategic deterrent.

Our strategic forces and the associated targeting policy
must, by any calculation, be perceived as making
nuclear warfare a totally unacceptable and unrewarding
proposition for the Soviet leadership. Accordingly, our
strategy:

0 Denies the Soviets the ability to achieve essential
military objectives by holding at risk Soviet
warmaking capabilities. This includes the entire
range of Soviet military forces, as well as the war
supporting industry which provides the foundation
for Soviet military power, and supports its capability
to conduct a protracted conflict.

0 Places at risk those political entities the Soviet
leadership values most: the mechanisms for ensuring
survival of the Communist Party and its leadership
cadres, and for retention of the Party's control over
the Soviet and Soviet Bloc peoples.

This basic strategy of targeting those assets which are
essential to Soviet warmaking capability and political
control has been U.S. policy for many years. In
implementing this strategy, the United States does not
target population as an objective in itself andgseeks to
minimize collateral damage through more accurate,
lower yield weapons.

We cannot permit any President to be faced with a
situation in which the only available responses to
aggression are Capitulation or massive destruction.

21

 

 

Thus, in addition to holding at risk the full range of
assets important to the Soviet leadership, the United
States also requires flexibility in the employment of its
strategic forces. It is essential that we have response
options appropriate to the broad range of plausible
situations. This flexible response capability bolsters the
credibility of our deterrent by making clear to the
Soviets that the United States has a variety of military
options with which to respond to aggression.

Finally, the United States also requires sufficient
residual capability to provide leverage for early war
termination, and to avoid coercion in a post-conflict
world. For this reason, we maintain a nuclear reserve
force as an integral part of our strategic forces. We also
maintain Continuity of Government programs as an
essential element of deterrence to assure the Soviets
they cannot escape retaliation by a quick,
“decapitating” attack aimed at incapacitating U.S.
political and military leadership.

These capabilities do not imply the United States seeks
to fight a nuclear war. I have repeatedly emphasized
that a nuclear war cannot be won and must never be
fought. But we seek to deter an adversary with a very
different strategic outlook from our own—an outlook
which places great stress on nuclear warfighting
capability. It is essential the Soviets understand that
they cannot gain their objectives through nuclear
warfare under any conceivable circumstances. To
achieve this we must ensure that they clearly perceive
that the United States has the capability to respond
appropriately to any Soviet attempt to wage a nuclear
war, and that we have the means to do this in ways
which will defeat Soviet military objectives without
necessarily triggering a massive nuclear exchange.

Strategic Defenses. Our policy of flexible response and
deterrence through the threat of offensive retaliation
has preserved the security of the United States and its
allies for decades. At the same time, the Soviet strategic
force buildup has threatened the foundation on which
deterrence has long rested. Looking to the future, the
U.S. Strategic Defense Initiative offers an opportunity to
shift deterrence to a safer and more stable basis
through greater reliance on strategic defenses. Such
defenses, which threaten no one, could substantially

22

 

enhance deterrence by injecting great uncertainties into
Soviet estimates of their ability to achieve their

essential military objectives in a first strike. ”Leak proof”
defenses would not be required initially in order to
deny the Soviets confidence that they could achieve
meaningful military goals. Even less than perfect
defenses could significantly increase stability by
eliminating plausible incentives for a Soviet first strike.
In judging the suitability of systems for possible
deployment, we will continue to be guided by the
criteria of military effectiveness, survivability, and cost-
effectiveness at the margin.

By reducing the military value of ballistic missiles, and
ultimately rendering them obsolete, strategic defenses
would also provide incentives for Soviet acceptance of
significant arms reduction agreements. In a world with
fewer ballistic missiles, however, Soviet incentives to
cheat would be greater. Strategic defenses can
effectively negate these incentives by eliminating the
military utility of covertly stockpiled missiles. Thus,
they offer the prospect of a safer, more stable world in
'which deep reductions in strategic offensive arms are
both negotiable and enforceable.

In short, the pursuit of strategic defenses has the
potential to bring about the most significant change in
U.S. National Security Strategy since the end of World
War II. By allowing us to move away from reliance on
the threat of massive destruction to deter aggression,
strategic defenses would change the entire U.S.-Soviet
strategic relationship in a positive way, increasing the
safety and security of the peoples of both nations and
their allies. We will continue to try to persuade the
Soviets to join with us in working out a stable
transition to this sensible and attainable goal.

U.S. Strategic Modernization Program. Continuing U.S.
strategic modernization is essential to assure reliable
deterrence, enhance stability, and provide motivation
for the Soviets to negotiate broad, deep, equitable and
verifiable reductions in strategic offensive arms. While
we are firmly committed to using arms control as one
component of our policy for enhancing U.S. and allied
security, it would be exceptionally dangerous to
anticipate success in arms control. Indeed, neglecting
strategic modernization in expectation of arms
reduction agreements would have the perverse effect of
decreasing the likelihood of such agreements by

reducing one of the principal Soviet incentives to
agreement.

History shows that a demonstrated will to maintain a
military balance with the Soviets and not allow them to
gain a significant strategic advantage is an essential
foundation for serious arms control negotiations. It was
U.S. action to rectify imbalances which brought the
Soviets to consider the major force reductions
discussed at Reykjavik. Even if we are successful in
achieving the agreements we seek, however, the United
States will continue to require modernized, mission-
effective, and survivable nuclear forces to provide
deterrence, promote stability, and hedge against Soviet
cheating or abrogation during the transition to new,
lower force levels.

For their part, the Soviets continue to invest heavily in
strategic modernization, with emphasis on accurate,
fast-flying ballistic missiles which can destroy hard
targets. Their goal has been, and remains, attainment of
an effective disarming first-strike capability. They have
always sought to enhance their ICBM survivability
through silo hardening. Recently they have also sought
to do so through mobility, including continued
deployment of the road-mobile SS—25, and preparation
for deployment of the rail-based SS-X-24.

At the same time, the Soviets continue to invest roughly
the same amount in their strategic defense programs as
in their offensive force modernization. They are
expanding and improving the world's only deployed
ABM system. They continue to violate the ABM Treaty
with their radar at Krasnoyarsk, enhancing their ability
to break out of the Treaty through rapid deployment of
a nation-wide ABM system. Their extensive civil
defense program includes a vast and growing network
of deep underground leadership shelters aimed at
ensuring the survival of Communist Party control over
the Soviet nation, economy, and military forces in war.
Their strategic communications are highly redundant,
survivable, and hardened against nuclear effects. Their
active and passive defenses, their unrelenting buildup
of offensive forces, and their published doctrine all
provide evidence of the Soviet nuclear warfighting
mentality, and underline the absolute essentiality of
maintaining the effectiveness of the U.S. strategic
deterrent. .

To this end, in 1981 we undertook the Strategic
Modernization Program in order to maintain the
essential survivability and effectiveness of our own
forces inlthe face of the continuing qualitative and
quantitative upgrade in the Soviet threat. Current
elements of that program, which remains our highest
defense priority, include:

0 Improved strategic command, control and
communications, to ensure timely warning of attack
and an assured means of passing retaliatory orders to
our strategic forces.

0 ICBM modernization, centered on the PEACEKEEPER
(MX) and Small ICBM, both of which will have
enhanced survivability through mobility.

- SLBM modernization, including deployment of the
TRIDENT submarine and development and
deployment of the TRIDENT II missile.

- Bomber and cruise missile upgrades, including
deployment of the B-1B, and the exploitation of the
important U.S. lead in low-observable technology by
development of the Advanced Technology Bomber

) and the Advanced Cruise Missile.

Strategic Defense programs, including SDI and the
Air Defense Initiative, to redress the long-standing
neglect of defensive programs generally, and to
capitalize on the potential which modern
technology offers for radically transforming the basis
for deterrence and laying the foundation for a far
more safe and stable strategic relationship with the
Soviet Union.

ARMS CONTROL

Arms control is not an end in itself but an integral part
of our overall National Security Strategy. It must be
viewed as only one of several tools to enhance our
national security and to promote our fundamental
national interest in the survival of the United States as
a free and independent nation. Our arms control
objectives are fully integrated with our defense and
foreign policies to enhance deterrence, reduce risk,
support alliance relationships, and ensure the Soviets
do not gain significant unilateral advantage over the
United States.

23

 

 

 

Based on this view of arms control as a complement to
a strong national defense posture, U.S. arms control
policy, since the beginning of this Administration, has
been guided by several fundamental principles:

0 The United States seeks only those agreements
which contribute to our security and that of our
allies.

0 The United States seeks agreements which reduce
arms, not simply codify their increase.

- Achieving agreements on broad, deep and equitable
reductions in offensive nuclear arms is the highest
arms control priority of the United States.

0 Within the category of offensive nuclear arms, the
United States gives priority to reducing the most
destabilizing weapons: fast-flying, non-recallable
ballistic missiles.

I The United States also seeks equitable arms control
measures in the area of nuclear testing, chemical
weapons and conventional forces.

0 The United States insists on agreements that can be
effectively verified and fully complied with. Arms
control agreements without effective verification
measures are worse than no agreements at all as
they create the possibility of Soviet unilateral
advantage, and can affect U.S. and allied planning
with a false sense of confidence.

These principles contrast sharply with the Soviet arms
control approach. The Soviets have historically sought
to exploit the arms control process to gain unilateral
advantage by shifting the military balance in their favor.
At the same time, they have pursued additional
advantage by failing to comply with important
provisions of existing arms control agreements, secure
in the knowledge that the United States does not cheat
and can be relied on for full compliance with
agreements in force.

This approach has proven at least partially successful
for the Soviets in the past. The arms control agreements
of the 1970s largely legitimized the planned Soviet
strategic buildup, while constraining our own force
modernization by reducing public support for essential
strategic programs. Typical of the defects of the past
was the SALT II Treaty of 1979, a fundamentally flawed
agreement which was never ratified. Unequal and

24

 

unverifiable in important provisions, it was inimical to
the security interests of the United States and its allies,
and to the stability of the U.S.-Soviet strategic
relationship.

Imperfect as these earlier arms control agreements
were, their faults have been compounded by the
Soviets’ failure to abide by key provisions—a failure
which. persists today. They encrypt telemetry associated
with ballistic missile testing in a manner which
impedes verification. They have deployed a prohibited
second new type of ICBM, the SS—25, and exceeded the
numerical limit on strategic nuclear delivery vehicles.
The Soviets have also violated the SALT I Interim
Agreement of 1972; and with respect to the ABM Treaty,
as noted earlier, the Krasnoyarsk radar remains a clear
violation.

As a result of both U.S. concerns with the SALT
structure and the poor Soviet compliance record, I
determined in May 1986 that, in the future, the United
States would base decisions regarding its strategic force
structure on the nature and magnitude of the threat
posed by Soviet strategic forces, and not on standards
contained in a flawed, unratified, and expired treaty
which has been repeatedly violated by the Soviet
Union. At the same time I indicated that—assuming no
significant change in the threat we face—the United
States will not deploy more strategic: nuclear delivery
vehicles, or more strategic ballistic missile warheads,
than does the Soviet Union. Thus, while ensuring an
adequate strategic deterrent, the United States will
continue to exercise the utmost restraint, in order to
foster the necessary atmosphere for obtaining Soviet
agreement to significant reductions.

While the United States’ priority objective in arms
control is deep reductions in strategic offensive arms,
we are also engaged in a wide variety of negotiations
and discussions on other subjects. The U.S. approach
to all of these areas is consistent. We seek only those
agreements which are equitable, verifiable, and will
enhance our security and that of our allies.

Specifically:

0 In the area of Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces
(INF), we seek the complete elimination of an entire

 

class of weapons: land-based longer-range INF
(LRINF) missiles. As an interim goal, we seek a
global agreement limiting the U.S. and USSR to 100
LRINF missile warheads each, to be deployed in
Soviet Asia and the United States, with none of either
side in Europe.

Consistent with our belief that strategic defenses may
offer a safer, more stable basis for deterrence, we
seek Soviet agreement for an orderly transition to a
more defense-reliant world.

I We have proposed an effectively verifiable global
ban on chemical weapons.

We seek alliance-to-alliance negotiations to establish
a more stable balance in conventional forces from
the Atlantic to the Urals, at lower levels. Such
reductions must be effectively verifiable and must
recognize the geographic asymmetries between the
two sides.

In the area of nuclear testing, we seek essential
verification improvements to permit ratification of
existing treaties: the Threshold Test Ban Treaty, and
the Peaceful Nuclear Explosions Treaty. Once our
verification concerns have been satisfied and the
ratification process is complete, we would be
prepared immediately to engage in negotiations with
the Soviets on ways to implement a step-by-step
program to limit and ultimately end nuclear testing,
in association with a program to reduce and
ultimately eliminate all nuclear weapons.

I Finally, we seek to improve stability through
improved measures which could prevent
misunderstanding during periods of crisis. We have
made progress on such measures at the recently
concluded Stockholm conference.

In all of these areas we consider effective verification to
be equally as important as specific negotiated limits;
they should be negotiated concurrently. We cannot
accept obligations that limit our military programs
unless we can effectively verify Soviet compliance with
those same obligations. This is particularly important in
light of the continuing pattern of Soviet violations
documented in the several_reports which I have
submitted to the Congress on Soviet non-compliance.

 

Substantial progress toward the achievement of U.S.
arms control goals was made at the October 1986
meeting in Iceland between General Secretary
Gorbachev and myself. At that meeting we agreed on
the outlines of a 50 percent reduction in strategic
offensive forces and a dramatic global reduction in INF
missiles. In the near-term, our primary focus will be to
work toward agreement in these areas. Consistent with
our priority on radically reducing the most
destabilizing strategic systems—and in response to the
Soviet desire for a ten—year commitment not to
withdraw from the ABM Treaty—we proposed to accept
such a commitment through 1996, during which time
research, development and testing, which is permitted
by the ABM Treaty, would continue. At the same time,
the proposed agreement provided for:

0 A fifty percent reduction in strategic offensive forces
of the United States and Soviet Union during the first
five years of the ten year period.

- Elimination of all U.S. and Soviet offensive ballistic
missiles of whatever range or armament during the
second fivegyears.

0 Agreement that either side could deploy advanced
strategic defenses after the ten-year period, unless
both agreed not to do so.

It is too soon to foresee the future course of arms
control following Reykjavik. Much depends on the
attitude of the Soviet Union. The United States has
tabled proposals in the Geneva negotiations reflecting
the areas agreed on in Iceland; the Soviet Union has
tabled proposals that only partially reflect the
achievements of Reykjavik. If the Soviets maintain their
current attempt to hold all progress hostage to U.S.
agreement to kill the Strategic Defense Initiative,
prospects for progress are dim. On the other hand, if
they are willing to implement the agreements reached
in Reykjavik, we can move now to achieve greater
stability and a safer world. In moving to that world, I
will maintain my commitment to broad, deep, '
equitable, and verifiable reductions, focused especially
on ballistic missiles, and my equally strong
commitment to the Strategic Defense Initiative as a
basis for moving to a safer, more stable form of
deterrence.

25

Finally, I should emphasize that the measure of success
in arms control is not the number of meetings held or
agreements signed. Rather it is whether those
agreements which are signed contribute to U.S. and
allied security and advance the cause of peace and
stability. Because of this, while the United States will
remain both creative and patient, it will continue to
reject calls for agreements which do not enhance U.S.
and allied security and contribute to global stability.

MAINTENANCE OF A
CONVENTIONAL DETERRENT

Forward Deployed Conventional Defense Capability.
Strategic nuclear capabilities are essential for
deterrence, but they alone are obviously not enough.
The United States and its allies require robust
conventional forces as an integral part of our overall
deterrent. The U.S. National Security Strategy is built
on the concepts of forward defense and alliance
solidarity. Consistent with this strategy, we maintain
large, forward deployed forces at sea and on the
territory of our NATO and Asian allies in time of peace.
The overall size and capabilities of U.S. armed services
are heavily influenced by the need to maintain such
presence, which is essential to deter aggression.

The most demanding threat with which those forces
must be prepared to deal is, of course, the Soviet
threat. Soviet forces may always outnumber our own-
even when allied forces are thrown into the balance.
For this reason, we must give the most careful attention
to maintaining our forces’ qualitative superiority at the
level necessary to accomplish their deterrent and
warfighting missions.

An additional premise of American defense policy is
that the United States does not seek to deal with the
threat from the Soviet Union unaided. A system of
vigorous alliances is the only effective way to deter the
Soviets. The most important of these alliances is NATO,
which for over a generation has preserved peace and
security in Europe. While no single NATO partner can
match the massive Soviet conventional forces, together
we are capable of fielding a powerful deterrent.

26

U.S. Contribution to NATO. The United States
contributes to this NATO deterrent in several ways.
Most visible is the peacetime stationing of over
300,000 military personnel in the European theater.
Although our allies contribute the majority of the
conventional forces in Europe, and would continue to
do so in crisis and mobilization, the presence of U.S.
forces makes it clear that it is not possible to attack a
NATO ally without simultaneously engaging the full
military might of the United States.

In addition to the direct provision of forces, the United
States provides security assistance to those NATO allies
whose economies do not permit them to make as great
a contribution to the common defense as they and we
would wish. Such assistance serves as an important
and cost-effective force multiplier, increasing both the
political solidarity and the military effectiveness of
NATO. Finally, the United States provides the main
contribution to the nuclear umbrella over NATO which
has been one of the pillars of NATO’s strategy for
decades.

The Strategy of Flexible Response. NATO’s deterrent
strategy requires a capability for flexible response,
appropriate to the nature of Soviet provocation. In
addition to robust U.S. and allied conventional forces,
backed by the strategic nuclear capability of the United
States, this strategy must be supported by effective and
substantial non-strategic nuclear forces as we|l..The
United States contributes to all legs of the ”NATO
Triad": conventional forces, non-strategic nuclear forces,
and strategic forces. NATO’s 1979 decision to
modernize its nuclear forces through deployment of
Ground Launched Cruise Missiles and Pershing II
ballistic missiles helped to redress the imbalance
created by the Soviet deployment of SS-20 missiles
targeted against NATO territory. It also signalled NATO
resolve to maintain the effectiveness and integrity of its
deterrent capabilities, and helped lay the foundation for
effective arms control negotiations aimed at reducing
the ballistic missile threat to NATO.

In clear contrast to the Soviet Union, it is NATO’s
policy to maintain non-strategic nuclear forces at the
lowest level capable of deterring the Warsaw Pact
threat. In pursuance of this policy, the Alliance decided
in October 1983 to reduce the number of warheads in
Europe by 1,400, in addition to the 1,000 warhead
reduction completed in 1980. These reductions, taken

independently of any arms control agreement, will
reduce NATO’s nuclear stockpile in Europe to the
lowest level in over 20 years. This makes it essential
that the remaining stockpile be survivable, responsive,
and effective.

Deterrence of Chemical Warfare. While neither NATO
nor the United States seeks to match the Soviets
weapon for weapon, deterrence would be weakened if
the Soviets were allowed to field a capability which
was completely unmatched by a countervailing NATO
capability. This premise, which underlies NATO’s
decision to modernize its theater nuclear forces, is
equally relevant to our own determination to
modernize U.S. chemical weapons capability through
development of modern, safe, binary munitions. This
modernization will provide us the capability to deter
Soviet first use of chemical weapons. In the absence of
such capability, we will remain dependent on an aging
stockpile of unitary chemical weapons ill-suited to
modern delivery systems, and alliance nuclear
capabilities, to deter such Soviet use—an obviously
undesirable and risk-prone situation.

The Scope and Intensity of Conflict. Our strategy
recognizes that the Soviet Union, together with allied
forces, is capable of simultaneous aggression in more
than one region of the world. Should aggression occur
in several regions simultaneously, U.S. military
responses would be governed by existing commitments,
general strategic priorities, the specific circumstances at
hand, and the availability of forces. This capability to
respond would be enhanced by the flexibility we have
built into our forces, including our capabilities for
global strategic mobility and power projection. This
capability to respond effectively in distant theaters
reduces the risk that we will ever have to meet such
attacks.

If we must respond to such an attack, our overall
objective would be to terminate the war as soon as
possible, at the lowest level of violence consistent with
the restoration of peace on terms favorable to the
United States and its allies. Should our initial attempts
to defeat aggression fail, however, U.S. strategy provides
for the flexible and sufficient application of force for as
long as combat continues to ensure that no area of
vital interest is lost. Should escalation occur, despite
our best efforts to contain the intensity of the conflict,
we would attempt to employ our forces in a manner
which would discourage further escalation while
achieving our national objectives.

Thus, our strategy recognizes that a variety of factors
would affect the nature, locations, and intensity of our
military actions in a conflict with the Soviet union. Our
strategy is not to try to fight "every where at once.” We
would do what is strategically sensible and
operationally achievable under the circumstances. But
we do need the capability for credible responses to
major threats worldwide, so we can ensure that our
weakness does not tempt our adversaries.

Other U.S. Commitments. NATO is not our only
alliance. The United States has bilateral or multilateral
security commitments with some 43 nations
throughout the globe.

In support of those commitments, and to deter Soviet
and Soviet client state adventurism, the United States
maintains forward deployed forces in many regions of
strategic importance. In addition to our fleet in the
Mediterranean, the United States maintains a large
naval presence in the Western Pacific. A smaller
presence in the Indian Ocean serves to support our
interests in Southwest Asia. U.S. Air Forces deployed
throughout the Pacific assist in meeting our security
commitments to such nations as Japan and the
Philippines. Substantial ground and air forces are
deployed in Korea to complement forces of the
Republic of Korea in deterring aggression from the
North.

Our global forward deployed forces serve several
functions. They are essential to the creation of regional
power balances which deter Soviet aggression and
promote overall regional stability; they support the
political independence of nations on the Soviet
periphery and hence are key to the fundamental U.S.
strategic objective of avoiding Soviet domination of the
Eurasian land mass; and finally, they provide an
immediately available capability to deal with lesser
military contingencies.

Although the Soviet Union represents the greatest
threat to the United States and its allies, as mentioned
earlier, it is not the only threat. Forward deployed
forces can also discourage local aggression, contribute
to regional stability, and serve as visible symbols of
United States’ will and capability to protect its interests.
For military contingencies not involving the Soviet
Union, however, the United States looks primarily to
the nations involved to provide for their own defense.

27

   

     

Direct involvement of U.S. military forces is a last
resort, to be undertaken only when clear political
objectives have been established, our political will is
clear, andappropriate military capabilities are available.
If U.S. combat forces are committed, the United States
would seek to limit the scope and level of the conflict,
avoid the involvement of the Soviet Union, and achieve
U.S. objectives as quickly as possible.

In the past six years we have made substantial progress
in improving the capability of our forward deployed
forces to protect U.S. interests, execute our National
Strategy, and support alliance commitments. We remain
firmly committed to continued improvement in our
deployed capabilities in support of our forward-defense,
alliance-based strategy. The following paragraphs will
discuss selected capabilities which provide essential
foundations for that strategy.

Maintenance of Global Support and Mobility
Capabilities. The ability to reinforce and resupply
forward deployed forces is essential to the execution of
the U.S. strategy of fonivard defense and alliance
solidarity. Rapid reinforcement of NATO during times of
tension, for example, is critical to effective deterrence.

The Soviets have a natural geographic advantage with
respect to countries on the Eurasian rim, and growing
capability to launch simultaneous offensives in Europe,
Southwest Asia and the Far East. Capitalizing on
interior lines of communication, they can redeploy and
resupply forces over a broad geographic range. Recent
Soviet efforts have significantly improved military
access, by rail and road, to strategically important areas
along the USSR’s southern frontiers.

Our global support and mobility capabilities, including
airlift, sealift, and prepositioning are therefore essential
to allow us to meet military challenges around the
periphery of the Eurasian continent, which remains the
primary locus of Soviet expansionist interests.
Prepositioning ashore or at sea can sharply reduce our
response times. Airlift, the quickest and most flexible of
our mobility assets, would deliver initial reinforcements
in most contingencies; but sealift will inevitably carry
the bulk of our reinforcement and resupply material, as
it has in past crises. To reduce response times, the
United States combines prepositioning with airlift and
sealift in an integrated fashion. Mobility capabilities are
especially critical to our strategies for dealing with

28

 

contingencies in Southwest Asia, where we have no
military bases or permanently stationed military forces.

Consistent with our alliance approach to security, U.S.
allies make critical contributions to the effectiveness of
our mobility capabilities. Not only do our allies
contribute airfield and port facilities, they also augment
our airlift and provide the bulk of our sealift capability.
Finally, allied cooperation is an obvious prerequisite for
prepositioning.

When this decade began, we faced severe difficulties in
moving large forces quickly enough to deter Soviet
aggression, deploying forces to two or more theaters
simultaneously, or moving material effectively into less-
developed regions. Since 1981, with the support of
Congress, we have made great progress in redressing
these deficiencies, adding substantially to our airlift
and sealift capability and prepositioning additional
large quantities of material abroad. Not all of our
objectives have been accomplished, however. In
particular, the continuing decline of the U.S. merchant
marine and U.S.-flag commercial shipping assets is a
matter of concern. This problem is compounded by the
decline of the U.S.-flag fleet which results in a
reduction of the seagoing workforce to man all our
U.S.-flag vessels—as well as ships of the Ready Reserve
Force, the National Defense Reserve Fleet and any
effective U.S. controlled ships which might need
recrewing. The lack of merchant mariners in the near
term could impede our ability adequately to project
and sustain forces by strategic sealift.

Maintenance of an Adequate Logistics Base. To
maintain a strong conventional deterrent it is vital that
we provide adequate logistic support for U.S. forces. A
robust logistics infrastructure strengthens deterrence by
demonstrating our preparations for hostilities at any
level of intensity, and for the length of time necessary
to defend U.S. interests. Adequate, sustained support
helps raise the nuclear threshold, strengthens
deterrence, and improves prospects for early success in
conflict. Adversaries must not conclude that U.S. and
allied capabilities would erode if confronted with a
complex or prolonged military campaign.

We have made substantial progress over the past six
years in improving our military logistics base, and in

 

the process provided stronger support for our ‘
deterrence strategy. With the support of Congress, we
will seek continued improvement in this unglamorous,
but essential component of military power.
Concurrently, we will continue to emphasize to our
allies the importance of improving the logistics base of
their own forces to ensure that their endurance in
combat will be parallel to that of our forces,-'

Maintenance of Adequate Active Forces. Support of
our conventional deterrent requires that we maintain
balanced and effective active forces sufficient in quality
and quantity to make our National Military Strategy
credible. In the context of our alliance relationships,
deterring and, if necessary, defeating the Soviet thrgeat
requires a carefully structured mix of U.S. and allied
land and sea-based forces capable of executing the . ,
agreed strategy until reinforced from the respective
countries’ mobilization bases. In the case of NATO, the
proximity of major Warsaw Pact ground, air and naval
forces to Alliance territory, the speed with which
modern conflict can unfold, the Facts significant
numerical advantages, and the Soviets’ strong doctrinal
emphasis on surprise, all argue‘ for substantial,
qualitatively advanced, and flexible U.S. and allied
conventional forces.

The land-based forces of the United States and its allies
would have primary responsibility for blunting a Soviet
attack and defending allied territory, while
simultaneously disrupting and destroying the follow-on
forces which Soviet strategy relies on to exploit any
initial successes. U.S. and allied ground forces,
supported by tactical air power, require the capability
to halt a Pact attack and restore the integrity of Alliance
territory if NATO political and military objectivesare to
be achieved. Absent such capability, Alliance strategy
becomes heavily dependent on the threat of resorting
to nuclear weapons to achieve essential deterrence and
warfighting objectives.

For decades it has been a fundamental U.S. objective to
reduce the risk of nuclear warfare by maintaining the
nuclear threshold at a high level. Achievement of this
goal requires that, wherever we confront Soviet forces,
the forces of the United States and its allies have the
capability to achieve their missions with conventional

 

 

arms. In the case of our land-based forces committed to
Eumpe, this requires constant upgrading and
modernization to retain a qualitative edge in the face of
the Pact’s superior numbers.

While NATO requirements properly occupy much of
our ground forces’ concern, the global nature of
potential threats to U.S. interests requires maintenance
of flexible and diverse ground forces capable of rapid
deployment to, and effective operations in, areas of
strategic importance. This has led the Army to establish
five rapidly deployable light divisions, while continuing
efforts have gone into the enhancement of Marine
Corps capabilities. These ground forces, with
appropriate tactical air support, provide essential
elements of our capability to deal with worldwide
contingency requirements.

Tactical airpower supports the achievement of ground
force goals by maintaining battleﬁeld air superiority,
providing responsive and effective firepower for Army
maneuver units, and conducting deep interdiction of
enemy forces, command and control capabilities, and
sources of logistic support. In addition, it plays a
critical role in assuring the essential reinforcement and
resupplylof U.S. forward deployed forces by protecting
port facilities, aerial ports of debarkation, and lines of
communication from attack and disruption. The
capability of air forces to deploy rapidly in crises adds
to our ability to deter threats to our interests in distant
areas, and to bring effective military power to bear
should deterrence fail. I ~

Maritime forces play a unique role in supporting our
military strategy. Given the realities of our geostrategic
position, fronting on two oceans, maritime superiority
is vital to support our alliance relationships and our
forward deployed forces. While maritime superiority
depends predominantly on the capabilities of our naval
forces, land-based air forces also contribute to its
maintenance in important ways, including early
warning of enemy air threats, long-range aerial tanker
support for sea-based tactical aircraft, and the laying of
anti-submarine mines.

Maritime superiority enables us to capitalize on Soviet
geographic vulnerabilities and to pose a global threat

29

   

 

to the Soviets’ interests. It plays a key role in plans for
the defense of NATO allies on the European flanks. It
also permits the United States to tie down Soviet naval
forces in defensive posture protecting Soviet ballistic
missile submarines and the seaward approaches to the
Soviet homeland, and thereby to minimize the wartime
threat to the reinforcement and resupply of Europe by
sea.

The mobile nature of maritime forces allows them
directly to influence land campaigns through the
application of sea-based tactical air power; and by the
use of amphibious forces to seize strategically
important territory, reinforce allies accessible from the
sea, or threaten the seaward flanks of enemy ground
forces.

This capability to project power far from our shores is
of particular importance, given the central position of
the Soviet Union in the Eurasian land mass, the fact
that many of the United States’ most important allies
are located on the Eurasian periphery and offshore
islands, and the volatility of many Third World areas in
which there is no U.S. military presence. Our naval
power projection capabilities would play an essential
role in any Southwest Asia contingency.

Essential to our wartime strategy, maritime superiority
plays equally vital roles in peacetime. Mobile maritime
forces, easily deployed in time of crisis, are a traditional
symbol of our nation's will and capability to defend its
vital interests. They have proven to be an indispensable
tool of crisis management for every U.S. president since
the end of World War II. Finally, by permitting the
rapid application of U.S. power, maritime superiority
contributes to regional stability, whether in the Indian
Ocean, Central America, the Middle East, or other
areas of strategic concern.

The trends in the maritime area are generally favorable.
We are steadily building back toward our goal of a 600
ship, 15 carrier battle group Navy. With continued
strong Congressional support, the programs of this
Administration should ensure our essential maritime
superiority for the remainder of this century.

30

   

Maintenance of Effective Reserve Forces and National
Mobilization Base. The effective mobilization of
manpower and industrial resources in the event of
conflict would provide essential support for our military
capabilities. With approximately 6 percent of GNP
devoted to defense, our peacetime economy focuses on
the needs of the civilian marketplace, not on the
nation's defense requirements. We rely on the inherent
size and strength of the U.S. economy as our ultimate
line of defense, tapping into civilian production to a
greater or lesser extent only as the situation may
require.

As a result, we require an ability to surge our industrial
base to produce the additional wartime materiel
needed during conflict. The health of the industrial
base, therefore, has clear military and strategic
significance. Accordingly, the U.S. Government
continues to promote initiatives which support
improvements in industrial productivity and
modernization.

Additionally, through its procurement procedures, the
government seeks to provide incentives for increased
productivity, improved manufacturing technologies, and
to increase U.S. competitiveness in the international
marketplace.

To complement our industrial mobilization programs,
the United States has maintained for over thirty years a
stockpile program to ensure a supply of critical raw
materials to support defense and essential civilian
needs during an emergency. It is important that we
continue to modernize our stockpile program to keep
pace with current requirements, changes in industrial
capacity and new manufacturing and technological
developments. Since fundamental disagreements on
stockpile policies exist with the Congress, we must
renew efforts to resolve our differences and develop
realistic goals and policies which will produce a
modernized stockpile for the future.

On the manpower side, the Total Force policy
established in the early 1970s places increased
responsibilities on the reserve component of U.S.
forces. Today, fully 50 percent of the combat units for
land warfare are in reserve components. Reserve units

  

perform important missions and support functions on a
daily basis. Their priority for manning, training, and
equipment modernization is not based on their
peacetime status as forces ”in reserve," but on the basis
of their direct integration into the nation's operational
plans and missions. In many cases, the sequence of
deployment in the event of conflict would place reserve
component units side-by-side, and sometimes ahead of
active duty forces.

To maximize the cost effectiveness of the Total Force
policy, we must continue to balance the combat and
support elements of our active and reserve force
structure, their costs, and attendant levels of risk. While
there are specific mission areas in which the role of
reserve components can be expanded, we must
exercise care to avoid making demands on our
personnel that would fundamentally alter the nature of
service in the reserves. Our peacetime operational
tempo, forward deployments, and our general strategy
of deterrence all require a substantial, balanced, and
ready active duty military establishment.

SPACE SUPPORT OF
NATIONAL SECURITY

The United States uses space systems to conduct a
variety of activities that are essential to our national
security, including command, control, and
communications, navigation, environmental
monitoring, warning, surveillance, and treaty
monitoring. Support of these important activities
requires assured U.S. access to space, supported by an
efficient and predictable launch capability. Therefore,
late last year I directed that U.S. national space launch
capability be based on a balanced mix of launchers
consisting of the Space Transportation System and
Expendable Launch Vehicles (ELVs). The elements of
this mix support the mission needs of the national
security, civil government, and commercial sectors of
U.S. space activities.

To support this approach, the Department of Defense
has undertaken an effort to achieve the design and

   

... «~ * -«ms

"rnrrnlntinn of forces” to Soviet advantage. The

 

procurement of a medium-sized EL\/. This will
complement the Shuttle, and existing small and large
ELVs. In addition, selected government satellites will be
designed for dual compatibility with either the Shuttle
or ELVs.

In view of the increasing reliance of U.S. and allied
forces on space-based support, we must be prepared to
protect our space assets against hostile interference.
Accordingly, other facets of the national security space
program include development of concepts and
techniques that allow systems to survive in crisis, and
the development of an anti-satellite capability to deter
threats to US. space systems, and to deny an adversary
the use of his space-based resources in war, correcting
a serious asymmetry in U.S. and Soviet space
capabilities. The Soviets introduced their anti—satelIite
(ASAT) system over a decade ago. Today it is the world's
only operational ASAT system. The Congressionally
imposed ban on testing of our developmental ASAT
system against targets in space leaves the Soviets with a
monopoly in ASAT capability and should be removed.

Overall, Soviet space programs are strong and growing._
Their well-publicized manned space programs, their
ambitious space scientific exploration programs, and
their impending heavy-lift space launch capabilities

will pose strong challenges to U.S. space leadership in

' the near-term. In addition, these capabilities provide

the base for rapid development and deployment of
military space assets in crises or war.

An emerging technology that has important security, as
well as civil and commercial applications, is the
National Aerospace Plane. The design of this plane
incorporates advanced air and space flight technologies
to yield an aircraft that can function in both the
atmosphere of earth and the vacuum of space. The first
flight of an experimental aerospace craft, which
capitalizes on important U.S. technological advantages,
could take place by the mid-19905.

INTELLIGENCE SUPPORT OF
NATIONAL SECURITY

Development and execution of a sound National
Security Strategy requires effective intelligence

31

away nun: uni. uluuvu ulutva "nu pug. v-

 

An effective U.S. response to this form of warfare
requires the national will to sustain long-term
commitments. The United States has addressed the
manifestations of Low Intensity Conflict through a
tough counter-terrorism policy; support for democratic
resistance movements; and political, economic, and
military assistance to developing nations to help them
prevent or combat low intensity challenges.

U.S. policy for dealing with Low Intensity Conflict
situations may be summarized as follows: When it is in
U.S. interest to do so, the United States:

0 Will take measures to strengthen friendly, nations
facing internal or external threats to their
independence and stability by systematically
employing, in coordination with friends and allies,
the full range of political, economic, informational,
and military instruments of power. Where possible,
action will be taken before instability leads to
violence.

0 Will work to ameliorate the underlying causes of
instability and conflict in the Third World by
pursuing foreign assistance, trade, and investment
programs that promote economic development and
the growth of democratic social and political orders.

0 May support selected resistance movements acting in
opposition to regimes working against U.S. interests.
Such support will be coordinated with friends and
allies and may contain political, informational,
economic, and military elements.

- Will take steps to discourage Soviet and other state-
sponsored adventurism, and increase the costs to
those who use proxies or terrorist and subversive
forces to exploit instability in the Third World.

The Low Intensity Conflict strategies that support these
policies must coordinate the use of a variety of policy
instruments among U.S. Government agencies and
internationally. Responses may draw on economic,
political, and informational tools, as well as military
assistance.

Economic Policy and low Intensity Conflict. U.S.
policy for Low Intensity Conflict recognizes that long
term political and economic development will reduce
the underlying causes of instability of the Third World,
help undermine the attractiveness of totalitarian
regimes, and eventually lead to conditions favorable to

U.S. and Western interests. Therefore, we will I
encourage expansion of free trade, the development of
private enterprise, and the expansion and
independence of local economies. U.S.’ development
assistance and economic aid programs facilitate these
policies. In addition, we will encourage private
investment in the Third World when that investment
supports balanced economic growth.

Informational Policy and Low Intensity Conflict. Low
Intensity Coriﬂict is a political struggle in which ideas
may be as important as arms. We hold significant
advantages over our adversaries in this area. In contrast
to our adversaries, we have an open political system
that thrives on communication and truth. We must
ensure, however,'that accurate information concerning
American ideals and objectives is available throughout
the Third World; substitute: and that the resources
needed to accomplish this are available.

Political Instruments and Low Intensity Conflict. We
recognize that other nations may not necessarily
develop along democratic lines identical to ours.
Nevertheless, we seek to encourage the development of

political systems that protect the rights of the individual

and provide for representative government, free
institutions, and an environment in which human
dignity can flourish. We do this partially by example,
and by defending our own ideals when they are
challenged. We can also promote development of
humane social orders by helping eliminate security
threats and the underlying economic causes of unrest
and instability.

Military Instruments in low Intensity Conflict. The
fundamental tenet of U.S. strategy for dealing with Low
Intensity Conflict directed against our friends and allies
is that military institutions in threatened states must
become able to provide security for their citizens and
governments. U.S. Low Intensity Conflict policy,
therefore, recognizes that indirect—rather than direct-
applications of U.S. military power are the most
appropriate and cost effective ways to achieve national
goals. The principal military instrument in Low
Intensity Conflict, therefore, is security assistance.

The primary role for U.S. armed forces in Low Intensity
Conflict is to support and facilitate the security
assistance program. The military services must also
stand ready to provide more direct forms of military
assistance when called upon. Usually, this assistance

33

 

 

 

 

will consist of technical training and logistical support.
The services and the Unified Commands must also be
prepared for the effective execution of contingency and
peacekeeping operations when such operations are
required to protect national interests. U.S. combat
forces will be introduced into Low Intensity Conflict
situations only as a last resort and when vital national
interests cannot otherwise be adequately protected.

Narcotics Trafficking and low Intensity Conflict.
Narcotics trafficking can breed violence, fuel instability
and threaten governing institutions wherever it is found.
The vast revenues produced by illegal narcotics sales,
and concomitant use of international financial networks
to launder the proceeds of these transactions, can
promote the type of instability that becomes a breeding
ground for low Intensity Conflict. For these reasons,
our policies for dealing with drug trafficking provide
important support for our efforts to deal with Low
Intensity Conflict.

Terrorism and Low Intensity Conflict. Under some
circumstances, terrorism can be an important aspect of
~'/ Low Intensity Conflict. This Administration has taken

34

 

significant steps to define and implement policies to
counter international terrorism. These policies focus on
deterring, pre-empting and effectively reacting to
international telfrorist incidents._Low Intensity Conflict
policy goes beyond this, however, and deals with the
broader problem of supporting groups and
governments against which terrorism is being used as a
subversive weapon.

We must realize that Low Intensity Conflicts are
frequently protracted struggles. In addition, most of the
instruments of power that we can bring to bear on
them work indirectly and over a long period of time.
Therefore, we must be patient in such struggles. It is _
important that we prevail, but especially important that
we recognize that we often cannot do so easily or
quickly. On the other hand, we do hold important
advantages. We represent a model of political and
economic development that promises freedom from
political domination and economic privation. If we can
protect our own security, and maintain an environment
of reasonable stability and open trade and
communication throughout the Third World, political,
economic, and social forces will eventually work to our
advantage.

 

 

V. Executing the Strategy

This portion of the report discusses U.S. capabilities to
execute the National Security Strategy discussed in
preceding chapters with particular emphasis on those
areas where resource shortfalls impede effective
achievement of important national strategy objectives.

FOREIGN POLICY
CAPABILITIES

The United States depends on foreign assistance and
other foreign operations programs to protect national
security, promote its interests, and communicate its
values and principles throughout the world. Our
foreign operations programs include economic and
military assistance, food aid, development assistance,
international education and communication programs,
the overseas operations of the State Department, and
many other important functions.

These programs convert our foreign policy into positive,
visible actions which provide assistance to people who
face severe economic privation, and promote the
economic and political development so important to
support free and democratic societies. The programs
also help governments seeking to defend themselves
from internal and external threats. By helping our
friends enhance their security, we can help create the
necessary preconditions for economic and political
development.

Equally important, our programs tell people about
American ideals and values. By building greater
understanding of what the United States stands for, we

can influence growth in positive directions. The overall
goal of our efforts is to create a more stable world in
which humane social and political orders can flourish
and which can support balanced economic growth. In
short, our foreign operations programs are intended to
support the types of positive change that will protect
our national interests over the long term. A stable
world whose nations can meet the economic needs of
their citizens and respect individual rights is a world
that is safer for the United States and its friends.

We spend only about two percent of our annual federal 

budget on the various foreign assistance programs. This
is indisputably money well spent. The good we do, the
problems we help solve, and the threats we counter
through our assistance programs far outweigh the costs.
They represent a highly leveraged investment.
Nevertheless, our foreign assistance programs do not
receive the support they deserve from the Congress. In
the last few years, Administration foreign operations
budget requests have been severely cut by the
Congress. Although all programs must bear the burden
of reducing the budget deficit, the cuts in foreign
assistance have often been grossly disproportionate
when compared with other programs.

This is penny wise and pound foolish. We cannot
dismiss foreign assistance as a ”give-away” program that
wastes money which could better be spent on
Americans. In the first place, such a characterization is
factually wrong. Much of the money we spend in
foreign assistance programs goes to purchase goods
and services produced here in the United States. Our
food aid programs are one of the best examples, but
other programs, such as foreign military sales, also
directly increase U.S. exports.

35

\

 

Furthermore, our assistance programs work to solve
problems, relieve hardships, and ameliorate conflicts
that, if neglected, could degenerate into crises
adversely affecting U.S. interests. Unless we can be an
active participant in encouraging the type of world
order we desire, we may find ourselves compelled to
defend our interests with more direct, costly, and
painful means.

- We face a foreign assistance funding crisis under the

FY1987 budget voted by Congress. In that budget, we
sought $16.2 billion for Foreign Economic and Military

Assistance. That assistance was carefully calculated to

support a broad variety of important U.S. national
security objectives.

Specifically:

0 Thirty-four percent of that budget was to go to Israel
and Egypt, reinforcing our vital search for lasting
peace in that region.

0 Twenty—six percent was intended for military access
states and countries hosting U.S. military forces such
as the Republic of Korea, the Philippines, Greece
and Turkey.

0 Eleven percent would have gone to Central America
and the Caribbean.

0 Seventeen percent was for countries which share our

democratic values and need our help to advance
them, such as Thailand and Colombia; where new
democracies have emerged, such as Bolivia and
Uruguay; and where fundamental economic reforms
are taking place, such as Ecuador and Senegal.

0 All other country programs accounted for only three
percent of the total foreign aid request. Some are
poverty-stricken African states to which we are
directing our humanitarian and technical assistance
programs. Others, such as Burma, are active partners
with us in the war against international narcotics
trafficking.

0 The remaining nine percent of our assistance was to
go to international organizations, multilateral
development banks, the Peace Corps, refugee
assistance, narcotics control efforts, and AID non-
country programs.

36

 

Congress cut our request to $13.6 billion. The effect of
this cut is devastating. After we meet our commitment
to the Middle East peace process, we have grossly
inadequate funds left to meet other requirements. As a
result, we are unable to fulfill our commitments to
countries that provide us with strategically important
basing and access rights. Indeed, some programs will
have to be cut over 50 percent this year. We face the
danger of falling behind in programs that are designed
to help key regions beset with severe economic and
security problems. We also can do little to help Third
World debtors get back on their feet.

The cuts signal a policy of retreat. Clearly, in the next
few months the Congress and the Executive Branch
must work together to find solutions to these funding
problems so that we can resume our positive role.
These programs are a key part of our first line of
defense in protecting American freedoms, and must
enjoy full bipartisan support to be effective. I solicit
such support for the FY 1987 supplemental
appropriations request which has been submitted to
Congress.

DEFENSE CAPABILITIES

Defense resources. The successful execution of any
National Security Strategy depends on the availability
of adequate resources. Strategies which depend on

unrealistic or unachievable assumptions about resource

availability are doomed to failure. At the same time,
recent history has taught us that the time between the
onset of a crisis and the need for a national security
response has dwindled over the years. The days when

nations could respond to crises by raising, training, and

equipping new forces are gone. This fact of life,
coupled with the sober knowledge that crisis situations
can burst upon the world with startling suddenness,
means that we must be able to deter aggression and
infringement of our vital interests at any moment, and
at places far removed from the United States.

In practical terms, this means that the Administration

must not adopt strategies that our country cannot afford,

I *4.;‘-.;.~..'»5 ' 1- ~-

and that our military leaders cannot and must not base
their plans on resources that are beyond the natiorfs
capability to provide. It also means that Congress,
operating from a shared view of U.S. national interests,
and the objectives which support them, must provide
the Executive with the resources necessary to
implement a realistic, prudent and effective strategy.

Providing for the common defense is the most
important responsibility of the federal government-
shared equally by the Executive and Legislative
branches. Partnership is the key to its successful
execution. In that spirit, in the early 1980’s—for the
third time since World War |I—Congress and the
Executive joined together in a concerted effort to
rebuild and strengthen our military capabilities.
However, unlike past build-ups, which were
characterized by high rates of consumption to support
combat operations in Asian conflicts, we focused this
time on investment. There were important manpower
and readiness problems to be overcome as well, but it
was clear that only an increase in investment would
produce the necessary positive, sustained impact on
the military balance.

This action was essential to redress the serious
imbalances between U.S. and Soviet capabilities which
had emerged during the 197Q’s—a period of
unprecedented military investment by the Soviets,
aimed at shifting the global ”correlation of forces”
decisively in their favor. Had we not arrested this
dangerous trend, the damage to our most fundamental
national interests would have been profound.
Fortunately, the Congress and the American people
recognized the essentiality of rebuilding the country's
defenses. As a result, we have achieved great progress.
Our level of investment roughly matches that of the
Soviets’. However, the legacy of a decade in which
Soviet investment far exceeded our own remains, and
must be corrected. ‘

Judgments about the adequacy of our defense program
ultimately come down to questions of risk. Put in its
starkest form, the issue is: how much risk to the
survival of this country and its free institutions are we
willing to accept? Military forces which are
unsuccessful in deterring major war fail the first test of

adequacy. We and our allies must have credible
military responses, the prospects of which convince our
adversaries that aggression would entail unacceptably
high costs for them. How much military power is
required to deter is inevitably a subjective question,
involving our sense of how others view our military
capabilities and our political will to use them, if
necessary. In this respect, our forces must not only be
adequate, but must be unmistakably perceived as
adequate to defend our interests, execute our strategy,
and preserve our alliance relationships.

Without question, the defense program required to
support our strategy is affordable. In fact, in the past
seven years, Americans have devoted an average of only
6.1 percent of GNP to defense—we|| under rates in the
19505 and 19605, which ranged from 7 percent to 9.2
percent. Likewise, at about 27 percent of federal
outlays, defense spending falls well below the
peacetime average of 38 percent during the postwar
era. In both instances, the increases of the early 1980s
seem large only because the spending of the late 1970
was so severely depressed. * ’

In the FY88-89 Defense Budget, I have not asked the
Congress to approve defense increases similar to those
of the early 1980s. At the same time, the Congress must
act positively to protect the gains that we together have
achieved. We must not continue on the path of real
decline in defense investment established during the
past two years. The time has come for us to join
together in supporting moderate, sustainable increases
in our defense budget, consistent with the economic
growth we expect for the nation as a whole, and with
the long-term challenge which the Soviet Union
presents to the free world. Together, as a nation, we
must break the pattern of costly and inefficient ups and
downs in defense spending, and support the path of
sustained, reasonable growth, at a rate which will
allow the continuing modernization of our strategic
and conventional forces, while maintaining adequate
levels of military readiness, sustainability, and force
structure.

Military Forces. Earlier in this report I set forth our
strategy for the maintenance of deterrence against
strategic nuclear or conventional attack on the United
States or its allies.

37

 

 

     

The execution of our strategy to maintain a credible
nuclear deterrent through the modernization of our
strategic forces has been successful to date. Major
elements of the Strategic Modernization Program have
been approved by the Congress and our strategic forces
are becoming more survivable and effective each day.
Weare improving the capability and credibility of our
diversified strategic force mix and will continue to do
so well into the next century.

As we look forward to the future, we are examining
options that will allow us to capitalize on the progress
made in the Strategic Defense Initiative to render
ballistic missiles obsolete and place deterrence on a
more stable long-term foundation. Strong support for
this program, which exploits our strengﬂws in advanced
technology, advances both our deterrence and our
arms control goals. Full funding of the FY88-89 budget
request for SDI is essential to sustain the important
progress made to date and allow the program to
proceed at an efficient pace.

The survivability of our land-based ICBM forces will
increase dramatically in the years ahead as we move
from older, fixed basing modes to new mobile basing
modes that contribute to stability through increased
survivability. The new concepts for mobile basing of
the Peacekeeper and the Small ICBM will revitalize the
ICBM leg of the strategic triad, significantly improve
deterrence, and allow implementation of the Scowcroft
Commission recommendations in a manner consistent
with earlier Congressional guidance.

As we continue to improve our strategic deterrent
forces, we must be mindful of the fact that our
conventional forces are the first line of deterrence, and
an essential means of supporting U.S. interests in crises
short of generalwar. With the emergence of rough
nuclear parity between the United States and the Soviet
Union, conventional forces have become even more
important to maintaining a secure deterrent. Our
current conventional force modernization program
contributes to a strong forward defense posture.

Key elements include:

0 The Arm;/s modernization program, which is based
on the new Air Land Battle doctrine, and provides a

38

combined-arms capability that will enable our
divisions to maintain a qualitative edge over the
much larger Soviet forces.

0 Ongoing modernization programs for our tactical air
forces supplement these ground force programs. The
ability of our tactical air forces to maintain local air
superiority and support ground forces requires
continuing improvement.

I The program to revitalize our special operations
forces is being fully implemented as one of our
highest priorities. This program will ensure that we
have highly trained forces immediately available to
respond to a broad range of crises and Low Intensity
Conflict situations, when our interests so require.

0 Improvements in C3|'are of continuing high priority
in order to strengthen the ability to employ our
conventional forces to their full capability.

0 New short and long range mobility forces are
improving our capability to transport and support
our fon/vard units, and to deploy forces in
contingencies. The ability to build up military power
rapidly in strategically important areas on the
Eurasian periphery is essential for deterrence, and for
neutralizing the geographical advantages of the
Soviet Union.

0 The warfighting capability of our naval forces is
improving markedly with the increase in the quantity
and quality of ships and aircraft. This long-term
program to assure our ability to use the world's
oceans in peace and war requires continuing

support.

The full impact of these major modernization programs
will be felt over me decade ahead. Accomplishment of
our objectives will greatly increase our conventional
deterrent capability. The net improvement in our
defense posture will not be marginal; it will be
fundamental. Full support of these programs is
essential to avoid deterioration of the U.S.-Soviet
conventional force balance, and assure that we have
conventional forces capable of conducting fon/vard
defense of our interests without recourse to nuclear
weapons.

 

 

As we pursue the qualitative upgrading of our forces,
we must continue to refine our plans and concepts for
employing them. Our military strategy is complex. To
accomplish their tasks the Services have developed
appropriate doctrines, organizations and tactics.
Ensuring that these are melded into a coherent
National Military Strategy presents a challenge in the
continuously changing international environment. This
problem is magnified by the diversity of potential
contingencies within the spectrum of conventional
conflict. At the theater level, regional strategies haw:
been developed by the Unified Commanders. These
strategies, together with other considerations global in
character, or which cross CINCS’ lines of authority, are
integrated into the National Military Strategy. That
strategy provides an effective basis for the employment
of our military capabilities worldwide, in a
coordinated, mutually supporting fashion. Our national
military strategy undergoes periodic reviews to
revalidate and update its essential elements. The results
will not only improve our capability for employment of
military forces, but provide stronger conceptual support
for development of our conventional force R & D and
procurement programs. In doing so, we are always
mindful of the relationship between nuclear and
conventional deterrence. Our long-term objective of
reducing our reliance on nuclear weapons, if
successful, demands special attention to maintaining
both the effectiveness of our conventional deterrent and
strong alliance relationships.

Improving Efficiency. An important part of the activity
aimed at supporting our National Security Strategy
includes a series of ongoing efforts to~improve the
management and operational effectiveness of our
defense establishment. Improving the efficiency of the
Department of Defense has been the subject of much
attention and a number of notable achievements over
the past six years. Most recently these efforts have
included the report of the Blue Ribbon Commission on
Defense Management, chaired by David Packard; and
Congressional action on defense reorganization. As a
result of this activity, important changes have been
accomplished in the way the Department of Defense
does business. The overriding objectives of these
combined efforts are to improve the quality of our
strategic planning; promote a tight linkage between

 

strategy, military requirements, and our acquisition
programs; and ensure that we realize maximum
military benefit for every defense dollar:

Important organizational changes have occurred; others
are impending. New Unified Commands for
Transportation and Special Operations Forces will
become operational this year, and we will shortly
establish the newly authorized position of Assistant
Secretary of Defense for Special Operations and Low
Intensity Conflict, concurrently activating the
Congressionally-mandated Board for Low Intensity
Conflict within the National Security Council
organization. The authority of the Chairman, Joint
Chiefs of Staff, and the Unified Commanders, has been
strengthened; and the new position of Vice Chairman,
Joint Chiefs of Staff, has been established.

In 1986, the Congressapproved my proposal to create
an Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition. This
appointment has led to a reorganization of
procurement functions within the Department of
Defense. These changes are intended to achieve a
major reduction in the time required to field new
technology and equipment, to involve the professional
judgment of the Joint Chiefs of Staff more directly in
the identification and validation of military
requirements, and to improve the efficiency of the
acquisition process generally. To promote technological
innovation, the role of the Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency in prototyping and other advanced
development work on joint programs has been
expanded.

To aid our understanding of future requirements, last
fall we established a bipartisan Commission on
Integrated Long—Term Strategy. This group of
distinguished Americans is working to provide the
Secretary of Defense and my Assistant for National
Security Affairs insights into the role and strategic
implications of new defense technologies over the next
twenty years. The Commission will also look at ways to
accelerate the introduction of the most promising new
technologies into our military forces. Possible new
threats resulting from ongoing Soviet research programs
will also be examined.

Changes underway in the defense planning process will
strengthen the relationship between the fiscal plans for
defense and the overall budgetaw plans for the federal

39

 

 

government. With the encouragement of Congress, we
are for the first time submitting a two-year defense
budget. In both instances, the objective is greater
stability for the defense program. While we will
continue to strive for greater cost control and savings at
the program level, the Blue Ribbon Commission on
Defense Management concluded that, in the future,
significant efficiencies in the defense budget were more
likely to be achieved through greater program stability
than through specific management actions.

Greater stability can be effectively accomplished only
through close cooperation between the Executive
Branch and the Congress. Our joint interest in
improving defense management has produced a series
of interconnected organizational and procurement
reforms that are now underway. We must now let the
Department of Defense implement these reforms and
assess their effectiveness without undue interference. It
is likely that some adjustments will be required. After
suitable experience with the new structure and
procedures, we will make appropriate
recommendations to the Congress.

INTEGRATING NATIONAL
SECURITY CAPABILITIES

As I indicated earlier, the effective achievement of our
National Security Strategy's objectives requires the
carefully integrated employment of all facets of national
power. To the maximum extent possible, we attempt to
achieve our objectives through employment of the non-
coercive elements of national power. This approach is
aided when we are able to identify problems early,
diagnose them thoroughly, and apply the pooled
insights and wisdom of my senior advisors to their
solution. The principal vehicle through which this
essential ‘integrating function is

40

accomplished is the National Security Council (NSC),
and the various interagency groups which function
under its supervision.

The NSC helps us apply our broad objectives to
specific situations and translate those objectives into
detailed policies and strategies. The overreaching task
of the NSC is to help ensure that my decisions are
made in a timely manner, and with benefit of the
clearest possible articulation of alternative courses of
action, their relative strengths and weaknesses, and
likely consequences.

The results of this process are formally recorded as
National Security Decision Directives (NSDDS). The
NSDDs, in the aggregate, provide a broad body of
guidance for the preparation of foreign and defense
policy, military planning, and the development of sub-
strategies to support the National Security Strategy's
objectives. Over the past six years we have developed
over two hundred and fifty NSDDs. Not all remain in
force, and not all deal with topics of global import; but
the process is effective in promoting the integrated
employment of the broad and diverse range of tools
available for achieving our national security objectives.

The continued development and successful
implementation of U.S. National Security Strategy is a
major responsibility of the Executive Branch. But the
Administration cannot accomplish this alone. ‘
Developing and supporting a National Security Strategy
for the United States that provides a sound vision for
the future and a realistic guide to action must be a
cooperative endeavor of the Congress and the
Administration.

I look forward to working with the Congress in a
bipartisan manner to achieve increased understanding
of, and broad support for, our National Security
Strategy and its objectives. There can be no endeavor
more important for the long-term well-being of the
American people; and I solicit the Congress’ closest
collaboration in achieving it.

 

 

VI. Looking Forward to the 1990's’

Six years ago, when the American people elected me
as their President, I was determined to achieve four
near-term, urgently needed objectives in the National
Security Strategy area:

0 First, to restore our nation's military strength after a
decade of neglect which allowed the Soviet Union
to overtake us in many critical categories of military
power;

\

0 Second, to restore our nation's economic strength
and reinvigorate the world economic system, in the
wake of the energy crisis and global recession;

0 Third, to restore the nation's international prestige as
a world leader, after some years of our image being
tarnished and our adversaries believing that the
United States was retreating from its international
obligations; and

0 Fourth, to restore personal motivation to all
Americans and carry our message to the world that
individuals and not governments should control
their economic, spiritual and political destinies.

After six years, I can report this restoration process is
well underway. The ship of state is heading in a new,
long-term direction which should be pursued over the
remaining years of this century. I believe that our most
important thrust in the National Security Strategy area
has been to restore the image of the United States as
the light of freedom throughout the world.

We have seen our message taken to heart by peoples
and governments throughout the world in these last six
years. We have seen nations change their economic
thinking to place more emphasis on the worth and
work of the individual as opposed to satisfying the
interests of the state. Weihave seen thousands of

freedom loving people take up arms against those
regimes which seek to impose their will on
populations who want peace and economic stability.
We have seen mounting opposition to those forces in
the world that aggressively employ military power and
coercion to achieve their goals.

This is what has given me the personal strength to
forge ahead in times of trouble and criticism, in times
of great risk and potential loss. I have seen that time is
on our side against those forces in this world that are
committed to the elimination of freedom, justice, and
democratic ways of life. Time is running out for those
regimes because people everywhere realize that the
way of life imposed by those forces is counter to basic
human values. People across the world see that we
offer a vision of the future. Our adversaries offer the
darkened ways of an unsatisfied past through
domination by military power, stifling statism, and
political oppression.

I have used every opportunity these past six years to
drive this theme home, both here and abroad. This is
also the dominant theme of our National Security
Strategy—the very pulse of our nation which must be
carried into the future to ensure that we remain strong
and innovative, vibrant and free.

We must never forget that freedom is never really free;
it is the most costly thing in the world. And freedom is
never paid for in a lump sum; installments come due in
every generation. All any of us can do is offer the
generations that follow a chance for freedom.‘

I ask that we stand together in my final two years as
your President to ensure that we continue setting in
place a strategy which will carry us securely into the
21st Century.

41

 

