NATIONAL
SECURITY
STRATEGY

OF THE
UNITED STATES

 

THE WHITE HOUSE
MARCH 1990

Contents

PREFACE...v

I. THE FOUNDATIONS OF
NATIONAL STRATEGY:
GOALS AND |NTERESTS...1

Enduring Elements of Our National Strategy... 1

Our Interests and Objectives in the 1990s  2

II. TRENDS IN THE WORLD TODAY:
OPPORTUNITIES AND
UNCERTAINTIES...5

The Crisis in Communism 5
The Industrial Democracies... 5
The Global Economy... 6

Third World Conﬂicts... 6
Trends in Weaponry... 6

Illicit Drugs...7

Refugees... 7

Issues for the Future...7

III. REGIONAL CHALLENGES AND
RESPONSES...9

The Soviet Union  9

Western Europe... 10

Eastern Europe... 11

The Western Hemisphere 12

East Asia and the Pacific... 12

The Middle East and South Asia... 13

Africa... 13

IV. RELATING MEANS TO ENDS:
OUR POLITICAL AGENDA...15

Alliance Relationships... 15

Arms Control 15

Strategic Arms Reduction Talks.. 16

Defense and Space... 16

ConventionalA rmed Forces in Europe... 16
Chemical Weapons... 16

Open Skies... 17

Confidence— and Security—Building Measures... 17
Nuclear Testing... 17

Proliferation... 17

Naval Forces... 17

The Contest of Ideas and the Nurturing of

Delnocracy... 18
Economic and Security Assistance...18

Military Openness... 19
iii

V. RELATING MEANS TO ENDS:
OUR ECONOMIC AGENDA...21

Global |mba|ances...21
Debt...21

Trade...21
Technology ...22

Energy...22

VI. RELATING MEANS TO ENDS:
OUR DEFENSE AGENDA...23

Overall Priorities 23

Deterring Nuclear War...24

Strategic Offensive Forces...24

Strategic Defenses... 24

TheaterNuclear Forces... 25

Command, Control and Communications... 25

Deterring Conventional War...25

Forward Defense through Forward Presence...25
Sharing the Responsibilities of Collective
Defense... 26

Forcesfor the Third World...26
The Mobilization Base... 27

Chemical Warfare...27
Space...27

Low-Intensity Conﬂict...28
Drug Trafﬁcking... 28
Intelligence Programs...29

Planning for the Future...29

VII. A PUBLIC TRUST...31

The Defense Management Review  31

Reducing Overhead Costs While Maintaining
Military Strength... 31

Enhancing Program Performance... 31

Reinvigorating Planning and Budgeting... 31

Reducing Micromanagement... 31

Strengthening the Defense Industrial Base... 32

Improving the Observance of Ethical
Standards... 32

Congress and the American People...32

Preface

In the aftermath ofWorld War II, the United States took on an unaccustomed burden—the responsibility to lead and
help defend the world's free nations. This country took bold and unprecedented steps to aid the recovery of both allies
and defeated foes, to provide a shield behind which democracy could flourish, and to extend its hand in aid of global
economic progress. The challenge of an aggressive, repressive Soviet Union was contained by a system of alliances,
which we helped create, and led.

In this historic endeavor, America has succeeded—bri||iant|y. But it was inevitable that new conditions created by this
success would eventually call for a new kind of American leadership. It was inevitable that our overwhelming

economic predominance afterthe war would be reduced as our friends, with our help, grew stronger. And perhaps it
was inevitable that the Soviet Union, met by a strong coalition of free nations determined to resist its encroachments,
would have to turn inward to face the internal contradictions of its own deeply flawed system—as our policy of contain-
ment always envisioned.

Today, after four decades, the international landscape is marked by change that is breath-taking in its character,
dimension, and pace. The familiar moorings of postwar security policy are being loosened by developments that were
barely imagined years or even months ago. Yet, our goals and interests remain constant. And, as we |ooktoward—and
hope for—a better tomorrow, we must also lookto those elements of our past policy that have played a major role in
bringing us to where we are today.

It is our steadfastness over four decades that has brought us to this moment of historic opportunity.
We will not let that opportunity pass, nor will we shrink from the challenges created by new conditions. Our response
will require strategic vision—a clear perception of our goals, our interests, and the means available to achieve and

protect them. The essence of strategy is determining priorities. We will make the hard choices.

This Report outlines the direction we will take to protect the legacy of the postwar era while enabling the United
States to help shape a new era, one that moves beyond containment and that will take us into the next century.

I invite the American people and Congress to join us in a dialogue that will inform and enlighten the difficult
decisions we will have to make in the months and years ahead.

Zmvcc

March 1990

I. The Foundations of National Strategy:

Goals and Interests

Enduring Elements of Our
National Strategy

Throughout our history, our national security strategy
has pursued broad, consistent goals. We have always
sought to protect the safety of the nation, its citizens,
and its way of life. We have also worked to advance
the welfare of our people by contributing to an
international environment of peace, freedom, and
progress within which our democracy—and other free
nations—can flourish.

These broad goals have guided American foreign and
defense policy throughout the life of the Republic.
They were as much the driving force behind President
Jefferson's decision to send the American Navy against
the Pasha of Tripoli in 1804 as they were when
President Reagan directed American naval and air
forces to return to that area in 1986. They animated
Woodrow V\ﬁ|son's Fourteen Points, and my initiatives
in support of democracy in Eastern Europe this past
year

In addition, this Nation has always felt a powerful
sense of community with those other nations that
shared our values. We have always believed that, al-
though the flourishing of democracy in America did
not require a completely democratic world, it could
not long survive in one largely totalitarian. It is a
common moral vision that holds together our
alliances in Europe, East Asia, and other parts of the
world—a vision shaped by the Magna Carta, our
Declaration of Independence and Bill of Rights, the
Declaration of the Rights of Man, the United Nations
Charter, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
and the Helsinki Final Act. The American
commitment to an alliance strategy, therefore, has a

more enduring basis than simply the perception of a
common enemy.

Another enduring element ofour strategy has been a
commitment to a free and open international
economic system. America has championed liberal
trade to enhance world prosperity as well as to reduce
political friction among nations. We must never forget
the vicious cycle of protectionism that helped deepen
the Great Depression and indirectly fostered the Sec-
ond World War. Like so many of its predecessors, my
Administration is committed to working with all
nations to promote the prosperity of the free market
system and, to reduce barriers that unfairly inhibit
international commerce. In particular, it would be a
tragedy of immense proportions iftrade disputes
weakened political ties that forty years of military
threat could not undo.

Our location on the globe has also defined a
consistent element of our security strategy. We have
been blessed with large oceans east and west and
friendly neighbors north and south. But many of our
closest friends and allies and important economic and
political interests are great distances from the United
States. Therefore, in the modern era we have
maintained the ability to project American power to
help preserve the international equilibrium—globally
and regionally—in support of peace and security.

In particular, for most ofthis century, the United States
has deemed it a vital interest to prevent any hostile
power or group of powers from dominating the Eura-
sian land mass. This interest remains. In the period
since World War II, it has required a commitment to
forward defense and forward military deployments,

and a recognition of the lesson ofthe 1930s—that
peace and security come only through vigilance and

preparedness. This strategy was described as a strategy
of containment of Soviet expansionism. Its purpose
was not the division of the world into American and
Soviet spheres of inﬂuence, but, on the contrary,
fostering the reemergence of independent centers of
power in Europe and Asia. Behind this shield, our
friends built up their strength and created institutions
of unity (like the European Community), and our
system demonstrated its political and economic
vitality. It was our conviction that in these conditions,
a steadfast policy of resistance to encroachments
would, over time, in George Kennan's famous words,
lead to "the breakup or the gradual mellowing of
Soviet power."

This we now see. The very success of containment
has created new conditions and new opportunities for
a new generation of Americans. We welcome this
change. Yet our basic Values—and our basic
geopolitical necessities—remain. As the world's most
powerful democracy, we are inescapably the leader,
the connecting link in a global alliance of
democracies. The pivotal responsibility for ensuring
the stability of the international balance remains ours,
even as its requirements change in a new era. As the
world enters a period of new hope for peace, it
would be foolhardy to neglect the basic conditions of
security that are bringing it about.

Our Interests and Objectives
in the 19903

Our broad national interests and objectives are
enduring. They can be summed up as follows:

The survival of the United States as a free and
independent nation, with its fundamental values
intact and its institutions and people secure.

The United States seeks, whenever possible in concert
with its allies, to:

- deter any aggression that could threaten its security
and, should deterrence fail, repel or defeat military
attack and end conflict on terms favorable to the
United States, its interests and allies;

- deal effectively with threats to the security of the
United States and its citizens and interests short of

armed conﬂict, including the threat of international
terrorism;

- improve strategic stability by pursuing equitable
and verifiable arms, control agreements,
modernizing our strategic deterrent, developing
technologies for strategic defense, and
strengthening our conventional capabilities;

- encourage greater recognition of the principles of
human rights, market incentives, and free elections
in the Soviet Union while fostering restraint in
Soviet military spending and discouraging Soviet
adventurism;

- prevent the transfer of militarily critical
technologies and resources to hostile countries or
groups, especially the spread of weapons of mass
destruction and associated high—technology means
of delivery; and

- reduce the flow of illegal drugs into the United
States.

A healthy and growing U.S. economy to ensure
opportunity for individual prosperity and a resource
base for national endeavors at home and abroad.

National security and economic strength are
indivisible. We seek to:

- promote a strong, prosperous, and competitive U.S.
economy;

- ensure access to foreign markets, energy, mineral
resources, the oceans, and space; and

- promote an open and expanding international
economic system with minimal distortions to trade
and investment, stable currencies, and broadly
agreed and respected rules for managing and
resolving economic disputes.

A stable and secure world, fostering political
freedom, human rights, and democratic institutions.

We seek to:

- promote the rule of law and diplomatic solutions to
regional conﬂicts;

- maintain stable regional military balances to deter
those powers that might seek regional dominance;

- support aid, trade, and investment policies that - establish a more balanced partnership with our
promote economic development and social and allies and a greater sharing of global leadership and
political progress; responsibilities;

- promote the growth of free, democratic political
institutions, as the surest guarantee of both human
rights and economic and social progress; and

- support greater economic, political, and defense
integration in Western Europe and a closer
relationship between the United States and the

- aid in combatting threats to democratic institutions European C°mm“nlly9
from aggression, coercion, insurgencies, subversion,
terrorism, and illicit drug trafficking. - work with our allies in the North Atlantic Alliance
and fully utilize the processes of the Conference on
Heallllys c00Pel'3llVe and Pollllcally Vlgomlls Security and Cooperation in Europe to bring about
relallons Wllll allles and frlendly n3ll0nS- reconciliation, security, and democracy in a Europe

_ _ _ whole and free; and
To build and nurture such relationships, we seek to:

. strengthen and enlarge the Commonwealth Of free - make international institutions more effective in
nations that share a commitment to democracy and PT0m0l111g PCEICC» WOTIOI Order» and P0l1l1C3L
individual rights; economic and social progress.

II. Trends in the World Today:
Opportunities and Uncertainties

Broadly and properly understood, our national
security strategy is shaped by the totality of the
domestic and international environment—an
environment that is today dramatically changing.

The Crisis in Communism

Future historians may well conclude that the most
notable strategic development of the present period is
the systemic crisis engulfing the Communist world.
This crisis takes many forms and has many causes:

- After the Vietnam trauma of the 1970s, the West's
political recovery in the 1980s—including its
rearmament and such successes as the INF
deployment in Europe—undermined the Soviet
leaders’ assumptions that the global "correlation of
forces" was shifting in their favor.

- While the industrial democracies surge headlong
into a post-industrial era of supercomputers,
microelectronics, and telecommunications,
Communist states have been mired in stagnation,
paralyzed by outmoded statist dogmas that stifle
innovation and productivity. Poor economic
performance, especially in contrast with the West,
has discredited a system that prided itself on its
mastery of economic forces. And the new
Information Revolution has posed fortotalitarian
regimes the particular challenge that clinging to old
policies of restricting information would lead to
permanent technological paralysis.

- A new Soviet leadership in the mid-1980s
recognized that its system was in crisis and
undertook an ambitious program of reform. Abroad,

this leadership sought a calmer international
environment in orderto concentrate on its internal
crisis. This has led, for example, to a Soviet troop
withdrawal from Afghanistan and Soviet diplomatic
interest in compromise solutions to regional
conflicts, as Moscow sought gradually (and
selectively) to scale back costly overseas
commitments. These commitments had been made
costly by indigenous resistance—supported by
reinvigorated Western policies of engagement.

- In 1989, in parallel with the negotiation on
Conventional Armed Forces in Europe (CFE), the
Soviets began unilaterally reducing their heavy
military burden and their presence in Eastern
Europe, while proclaiming (and thus far
demonstrating) a more tolerant policy toward their
East bloc neighbors’ internal affairs. We have seen
powerful pent-up democratic forces unleashed all
across Eastern Europe that have overturned
Communist dictatorships and are reversing the
pattern of Soviet dominance.

We are facing a strategic transformation born ofthe
success of our postwar policies. Yet, such fundamental
political change will likely be turbulent. There may be
setbacks and new sources of instability. Happy
endings are never guaranteed. We can only be
impressed by the uncertainties that remain as the So-
viet Union and the states of Eastern Europe, each in
its own way, advance into historically uncharted
waters.

The Industrial Democracies

The industrial democracies also face strategic
challenges, some ofthem serious, but they too are

largely the Products of our success. These include a
shifting balance of economic power and the danger
that trade disputes in an era of economic change and
adjustment could strain political and security ties.
Such strains would be especially damaging at a
moment when we need to maintain strength and
unity to take best advantage of new opportunities in
East—West relations which that strength and unity have
helped bring about.

The growing strength and self—reliance of our allies in
Western Europe and East Asia have already resulted in
a greater sharing of leadership responsibility—as the
European Community (EC) has shown in policies
towards Eastern Europe and as Japan has shown in
international economic assistance.

One of the dramatic strategic developments of the
1990s will be the new role of Japan and Germany as
successful democracies and economic and political
leaders. U.S. policy has long encouraged such an
evolution. It will provide powerful new reasons to
maintain the partnerships—the Atlantic Alliance, the
EC, and the U.S.—Japan security alliance—that have
fostered reconciliation, reassurance, democracy, and
security in Europe and Asia in the postwar period.

The Global Economy

In a new era of technological innovation and global
markets, the world economy will be more competitive
than ever before. The phenomenal growth in East Asia
will likely continue, and by early in the next century
the combined output of Japan, the Republic of Korea,
China, and Taiwan may exceed our own. Western
Europe—as it progressively removes barriers to the
free flow of labor, capital, and goods within the EC—
will become an even stronger economic power. The
Soviet Union, even with a measure of success for
perestroika, will likely slip further behind the United
States, Japan, and Western Europe in output. In many
other areas of the world, economic expansion will not
keep pace with population growth or the debt

burden, further squeezing resources and fomenting
unrest and instability. All these developments carry
significant security implications as well as their
obvious economic and social import.

The diffusion of economic power that will almost
certainly continue is, in part, a reflection of a wise

6

and successful U.S. policy aimed at promoting
worldwide economic growth. Provided that the world
economic system remains an open and expanding
one, we ourselves will benefit from the growth of
others. But American leadership will remain pivotal. A
healthy American economy is essential to sustain that
leadership role, as well as to foster global economic
development and ease dangerous pressures for
unilateralism, regionalism, and protectionism.

Third World Conﬂicts

In a new era, some Third World conflicts may no
longer take place against the backdrop of superpower
competition. Yet many will, for a variety of reasons,
continue to threaten U.S. interests. The erosion of
U.S.—Soviet bipolarity could permit and in some ways
encourage the growth of these challenges.

Highly destructive regional wars will remain a danger,
made even greater by the expansion of the armed
forces of regional powers and the proliferation of
advanced weaponry. And it will be increasingly diffi-
cult to slow the spread of chemical, biological, and
nuclear weapons—along with long—range delivery
systems. Instability in areas troubled by poverty,
injustice, racial, religious or ethnic tension will
continue, whether or not exploited by the Soviets.
Religious fanaticism may continue to endanger
American lives, or countries friendly to us in the
Middle East, on whose energy resources the free
world continues to depend. The scourge of terrorism,
and of states who sponsor it, likewise remains a
threat.

Trends in Weaponry

Modern battlefields are characterized by an
unprecedented lethality. The greater precision, range,
and destructiveness of conventional weapons now
extend war across a wider geographic area, and make
it much more rapid and intense. As global weapons
production becomes more diffused, these weapons are
increasingly available to smaller powers, narrowing
the military gap between ourselves and regional states
and making some Third World battlefields in many
ways as demanding as those we would expect in
Central Europe.

The United States has a competitive edge in most
technologies relevant to advanced weaponry, but we
must continue to translate this advantage into fielded
weapon systems supported by appropriate tactical
doctrine and operational art. New conditions require
continuing innovation as we move to incorporate
stealth technology, extremely accurate weapons,
improved means of locating targets, and new
operational concepts into our combat forces.

Illicit Drugs

Traffic in illicit drugs imposes exceptional costs on the
economy of the United States, undermines our
national values and institutions, and is directly
responsible for the destruction and loss of many
American lives. The international traffic in illicit drugs
constitutes a major threat to our national security and
to the security of other nations.

We will increase our efforts to reduce both the supply
of and the demand for illicit drugs. Internationally, we
will attack the production of such drugs, and the
multinational criminal organizations which enable
illicit drugs to be processed, transported, and
distributed. A cornerstone of our international drug
control strategy is to work with and motivate other
countries to help defeat the illicit drug trade and re-
duce the demand for drugs.

As we intensify our programs, we will increase our
actions aimed at controlling the flow of drugs across
our borders. In this area, as in others, we will make
increased use of the resources and expertise provided
by the Department of Defense. We recognize that
military involvement in this mission has costs, and
that in a world of finite resources increased effort here
is at the expense of other important defense activities.
We accept these trade—offs, and we will do the job.

Refugees

The dislocations of a turbulent world—famine,
persecution, war, and tyranny—have swelled the wave
of refugees across the planet to a total that now
exceeds 14 million. Many have literally been forced
from their homes by the heavy hand of tyranny.

Thousands of others have ﬂed their homelands to
escape oppression. Millions from Afghanistan,
Ethiopia, and Mozambique have moved simply to stay
alive. Others subsist in camps, from one generation to
the next, awaiting solutions to seemingly intractable
political and ethnic disputes. Beyond the deep
personal tragedies these figures represent, such a vast
refugee population taxes the world community's
resources, denies to that community the many
contributions these peoples could make in more
benign circumstances, and fuels the hatreds that will
ignite future conflicts.

The United States has a proud tradition, as long as
our history, of welcoming refugees to our shores. We
also take pride in our work with international
agencies to provide assistance and relief for refugees,
even as we strive politically to resolve the conﬂicts
that provoked their flight. We have encouraged the
restructuring of relief organizations to make them
more effective and efficient—to make certain that
scarce resources reach those who need them. This
year, through our budget and the generosity of private
groups, we will take in more refugees than last year.
We will maintain a compassionate and generous
program of resettlement in the United States and
assistance for refugees worldwide.

Issues for the Future

The security environment we face in the 1990s is
more hopeful, but in many ways also more uncertain
than at any time in the recent past. Some of the
questions before us are:

- How can we ensure continued international
stability as U.S.—Soviet bipolarity gives way to
global interdependence and multipolarity? What
will be America's continuing leadership role—and
the new roles of leadership assumed by our allies?

- What are the risks that today's positive strategic
trends will be reversed, and how do we take due
account of them in our long—term planning? How
much risk can we prudently accept in an era of
strategic change, fiscal austerity, and great
uncertainty?

- While.maintaining a balance of power with the

Soviet Union as an inescapable American priority,
how do we adapt our forces for the continuing
challenge of contingencies elsewhere in the world?

How do we maintain the cohesion among allies
and friends that remains indispensable to common
security and prosperity, as the perceived threat of a
common danger weakens?

What will be the structure of the new Europe—
politically, economically, and militarily—as the

Eastern countries move toward democracy and
Germany moves toward unification?

- If military factors loom less large in a world of a
more secure East—West balance, how shall we
marshall the other instruments of policy to promote
our interests and objectives?

In shaping a national security strategy for the 1990s,
we will need answers to these and other questions.
Our preliminary assessments are reﬂected in the
sections that follow.

111. Regional Challenges and Responses

Although we are a global power, our interests are not
equally engaged orthreatened everywhere. In the face
of competing demands, budgetary stringency, and an
improving East—West climate, we must review our
priorities. Where our capabilities fall short of needs,
we must assess the risks and employ the full panoply
of our policy instruments to minimize them.

Our relationship with the Soviet Union retains a stra-
tegic priority because that country remains the only
other military superpower. Even as tensions ease and
military forces are reduced on both sides, maintaining
the global strategic balance is inescapably an
American concern; there is no substitute for our
efforts.

Yet, the extraordinary changes taking place, if their
promise is fulfilled, will permit important changes in
our defense posture—and a greater possibility of
viewing other regions in their own right, independent
of the East—West context.

The Soviet Union

Our goal is to move beyond containment, to seek the
integration of the Soviet Union into the international
system as a constructive partner. For the first time in
the postwar period, this goal appears within reach.

The Soviet Union has taken major steps toward
rapprochement with the international system, after sev-
enty years of seeking to undermine it; it has
repudiated its doctrines of class warfare and military
superiority and criticized major tenets of its own
postwar policy. It has begun to move toward
democracy. All this we can only applaud.

The United States will seek to engage the USSR in a
relationship that is increasingly cooperative. Moscow
will ﬁnd us a willing partner in creating the
conditions that will permit the Soviet Union to join,
and be welcome in, a peaceful, free, and prosperous
international community. We will expand contacts for
mutual benefit, to promote the free flow of ideas and
democratic values in the Soviet Union, and to lay a
firmer foundation for a deeper relationship over the
long term. Our Open Lands proposal, for example,
would abolish the "closed zones" that unnecessarily
impede contacts by diplomats, businessmen, tourists,
students, and journalists. To support Soviet economic
reform, I have proposed immediate negotiations on a
U.S.—Soviet trade agreement so that—pending action by
the Supreme Soviet to codify emigration reform—we
could grant Most Favored Nation status to the Soviet
Union at the June 1990 Summit. We have offered to
support observer status forthe Soviet Union in the
structures created by the General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade (GATT) after the Uruguay Round of
Multilateral Trade Negotiations is completed, and I
personally urged Chairman Gorbachev to use the
intervening time to move more rapidly towards market
practices in the Soviet economy. We are also
expanding technical economic cooperation and have
begun discussions on a bilateral investment treaty.

We strongly support today's dramatic process of
political and economic reform, and have a significant
stake in its success. Yet, U.S. policy does not and
cannot depend on a particular leader or set of leaders
in the USSR. We look for fundamental alterations in
Soviet institutions and practices that can only be
reversed at great economic and political costs. In the
political sphere, democracy is the best assurance of
irreversible change. In the military sphere, with
agreements in p|ace—and weapons destroyed,

production lines converted, and forces demobilized—
any future Soviet leadership would find it costly, time-
consuming, and difficult to renew the pursuit of
military supremacy and impossible to attempt without
providing ample strategic warning. These must be our
standards.

Even if the U.S.—Soviet relationship remains
competitive, it can be made less militarized and far
safer. We will seek effectively verifiable arms control
agreements with the Soviet Union and others as an
integral component of our security strategy.

But whatever course the Soviets take over the next
decade, the Soviet Union will remain a formidable
military power. The United States must continue to
maintain modern defenses that strengthen deterrence
and enhance security. We cannot ignore continuing
Soviet efforts to modernize qualitatively even as they
cut back quantitatively. As Chairman Gorbachev
declared last September 21st, "While reducing
expenditure for [defense] purposes, we are paying
attention to the qualitative rearmament of the Army,
and in this way we are not permitting the overall
level of our defense capability to be weakened in any
degree." Our response thus represents prudent
caution, but the Soviet leadership and people should
realize that it is a caution based on uncertainty, not
on hostility.

Restructuring the Soviet Union's relationship to the
international community is as ambitious a task as
containment was for its time. Responsibility for
creating the conditions for it lies first and foremost
with the Soviet Union itself. But the United States is
determined, together with our allies, to challenge and
test Soviet intentions and—while maintaining our
guard—to work to put Soviet relations with the West
on a firmer, more constructive course than had ever
been thought possible in the postwar era.

Western Europe

The nations of the Atlantic Community, defined by
their common values, are the founding members of a
larger commonwealth of free nations—those states that
share a commitment to freedom and individual rights.
Ours is an alliance rooted in a shared history and

10

heritage. Even if the military confrontation in Europe
diminishes dramatically—as is our goal—the natural
partnership of democratic allies will endure, grounded
in its moral and political values.

The continued strength of the Alliance and our
leadership within it remain essential to peace. The
Soviet Union, even if its forces were pulled back
entirely within its territory, would remain by virtue of
geography a major military factor in Central Europe.
Security and stability in Europe will therefore continue
to depend on a substantial American presence,
political and military. As I have repeatedly pledged,
the United States will maintain significant military
forces in Europe as long as our allies desire our pres-
ence as part of a common security effort. Our nuclear
power remains the ultimate deterrent of aggression,
even at lower force levels.

In Europe's emerging new political environment,
moreover, the Atlantic Alliance remains a natural
association of free nations and the natural framework
for harmonizing Western policies on both security
and diplomacy. It embodies the continuing American
commitment to Europe; it also sustains the overall
structure of stability that can assure the success of
the democratic evolution of Central and Eastern
Europe.

Yet, within this framework, the "European pillar" of
the Atlantic world is being strengthened before our
eyes—another dramatic development of this period.
The United States categorically supports greater West-
ern European economic and political integration, as a
fulfillment of Europe's identity and destiny and as a
necessary step toward a more balanced sharing of
leadership and responsibility within the broader
Atlantic Community. European unity and Alliance
partnership do not conﬂict; they reinforce each other.
We support the European Community's efforts to
create a single unified market by 1992. A strong
European Community will ensure more efficient use
of European resources for common efforts, and will
also be a strategic magnet to the nations of Eastern
Europe. We also support increased Western European
military cooperation and coordination, within the
overall framework of the Atlantic Alliance, including
both bilateral efforts and those in the Western
European Union. We strongly support the
independent British and French nuclear deterrent
forces and their continued modernization.

The unification of Germany is coming about—by
peaceful means, on the basis of democracy, and in
the framework of the Western relationships that have
nurtured peace and freedom for four decades. This is
a triumph for the West. We expect a unified Germany
to remain a member of both the North Atlantic
Alliance and the European Community, as all of us
seek to foster the conditions for wider reconciliation
in Europe.

As the European—American relationship shifts, frictions
can arise. Statesmanship will be needed to ease them.
The challenges that the Western democracies face in
this environment, however, are challenges to wise
policy, not to the nature of their system. Assuming the
democracies maintain discipline in their diplomatic,
defense, and economic policies, we face an
extraordinary opportunity to shape events in
accordance with our values and our vision of the
future.

Eastern Europe

The United States and its allies are dedicated to
overcoming the division of Europe. All the countries
of Eastern Europe are entitled to become part of the
worldwide commonwealth of free nations as, one by
one, they reclaim the European cultural and political
tradition that is their heritage. Overcoming this
division depends on their achievement of self-
determination and independence. We will accept no
arrangements with Moscow that would limit these
rights, and we expect the Soviet Union to continue to
repudiate in deeds as well as in words all right and
pretext to intervene in the affairs of East European
states. A free and prosperous Eastern Europe is not a
threat to legitimate Soviet security interests, and every
day it becomes easier to envision the time when East-
ern and Western states can freely associate in the
same social and economic organizations. The Cold
War began with the division of Europe. It can truly
end only when Europe is whole again.

We share with our allies a vision of Europe whole
and free:

- We believe democratic institutions and values will
be the core of the new Europe, as it is these
institutions and values that today stand vindicated.

' Even as fundamental political changes are still
evolving, we place high priority on moving rapidly
to a level of forces lower and more stabilizing, with
greater openness for military activities.

The United States intends to play a role in fostering
Eastern Europe's economic development, supporting
its democratic institutions, and ensuring the overall
structure of stability. It has become dramatically clear
that the American role is welcomed by the peoples of
Eastern Europe, who—in the new Europe that is
emerging—see our presence as reassuring. Naturally,
our relations with East European countries will be
affected by their policies on matters of concern to us,
such as espionage, illicit technology transfer,
terrorism, and subversion in the Third World.

In November—as an investment in our own security
as well as in the freedom and well—being of the
peoples of Eastern Europe—I signed into law
legislation authorizing $938 million in assistance

to support democracy in Poland and Hungary. In my
FY 1991 budget I have proposed an additional

$300 million as we begin to expand our program to
encompass other new East European democracies.
In addition, we have offered our best advice

and expertise in support of economic reform,

trade liberalization, labor market reforms,

private sector development, and environmental
protection. This marks a major and positive

step in bipartisan foreign policy and underscores
the strength of the American commitment to assist
Eastern Europe's historic march toward

freedom.

We will also look to the Conference on Security and
Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) to play a greater role,
since the CSCE stands for the freedom of people to
choose their destiny under a rule of law with rulers
who are democratically accountable. We suggested
last year that we expand the CSCE human rights
basket to include standards for democratic

pluralism and free elections, and that we breathe new
life into the economic dimension of CSCE by
focusing on the practical problems of the transition
from stagnant planned economies to free and
competitive markets. The time is ripe for such

steps.

11

The Western Hemisphere

The Western Hemisphere has within reach the great
goal of becoming history's first entirely democratic
hemisphere. The dramatic victory of the Nicaraguan
opposition in the February 25th elections has given a
significant boost to the underlying trend toward
democracy evident in the region over the past several
years. The United States has long considered that its
own security is inextricably linked to the hemisphere's
collective security, social peace, and economic
progress. The resurgence of democracy supports these
objectives, and strengthens our natural unity just as
another traditional stimulus to solidarity—fear of an
extra—hemispheric threat—is receding. In a new era,
our hemispheric policy seeks a new spirit of mature
partnership.

We must continue, however, to counter security
threats. Improvement in our relations with Cuba
depends upon political liberalization there and an end
to its subversion of other governments and the
undermining of the peace process in the region. In
Nicaragua, our goal is to assist the new government
of Violeta Chamorro in its efforts to nurture
democratic institutions, rebuild the economy, and
scale back the Nicaraguan military. We support the
Salvadoran government's military and political efforts
to defeat the Communist insurgency.

Central America remains a disruptive factor in the
U.S.—Soviet relationship. We hold the Soviet Union
accountable for the behavior of its clients, and believe
that Soviet cooperation in fostering democracy in the
region is an important test of the new thinking in
Soviet policy.

We will find new ways to cooperate with our two
closest neighbors, Canada and Mexico. We strongly
support the new democratic government in Panama,
which is also the best long—term guarantee of the
security and efficient operation of the Panama Canal.
We will continue to seek a transition to democracy in
Haiti, promoting international efforts in support of free
elections. The return to democracy in most of Latin
America will put new emphasis on our efforts to
support professional, apolitical militaries. We will also
confront the challenge to democracy posed by the
drug trade and debt problems.

12

East Asia and the Pacific

Our network of alliances and our forces deployed in
the region have ensured the stability that has made
this area's striking progress possible.

In addition to our own deterrent strength, security in
the region has rested since the 1970s on an
unprecedented structure of harmonious relations
among the region's key states. Our alliance with Japan
remains a centerpiece of our security policy and an
important anchor of stability. Japan's importance is
now global. Our relationship is one of the most
important bilateral relationships in the world and it is
in our strategic interest to preserve it.

The relationship between the United States and
China, restored in the early 1970s after so many years
of estrangement, has also contributed crucially to
regional stability and the global balance of power.
The United States strongly deplored the repression in
China last June and we have imposed sanctions to
demonstrate our displeasure. At the same time, we
have sought to avoid a total cutoff of China's ties to
the outside world. Those ties not only have strategic
importance, both globally and regionally; they are
crucial to China's prospects for regaining the path of
economic reform and political liberalization. China's
angry isolation would harm all of these prospects.

The U.S. security commitment to the Republic of
Korea remains firm; we seek a reduction in tensions
on the Korean peninsula and fully endorse Seoul's
efforts to open a fruitful South—North dialogue. Our
strong and healthy ties with our ally Australia
contribute directly to regional and global stability. The
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
continues to play a major role in the region's security
and prosperity.

In Cambodia, the United States seeks a comprehen-
sive settlement, one which will bring the Cambodian
people true peace and a government they have freely
chosen.

As we have amply demonstrated, we support the
Philippines‘ democratic institutions and its efforts to
achieve prosperity, social progress, and internal
security. We will negotiate with the Philippines in
good faith on the status of our military facilities there.

These facilities support a continued and needed
American forward presence that benefits us, the
Philippines, regional security, and global stability.

The Middle East and
South Asia

The free world's reliance on energy supplies from this
pivotal region and our strong ties with many of the
region's countries continue to constitute important
interests of the United States.

Soviet policies in the region show signs of
moderating, but remain contradictory. The supply of
advanced arms to Libya and Syria continues (as does
the cultivation of Iran), though Soviet diplomacy has
moved in other respects in more constructive
directions.

The Middle East is a vivid example, however, of a
region in which, even as East—West tensions diminish,
American strategic concerns remain. Threats to our
interests—including the security of Israel and
moderate Arab states as well as the free flow of oil—
come from a variety of sources. In the 1980s, our
military engagements—in Lebanon in 1983-84, Libya
in 1986, and the Persian Gulf in l987—88—were in
response to threats to U.S. interests that could not be
laid at the Kremlin's door. The necessity to defend our
interests will continue.

Therefore, we will maintain a naval presence in the
eastern Mediterranean Sea, the Persian Gulf, and the
Indian Ocean. We will conduct periodic exercises
and pursue improved host—nation support and
prepositioning of equipment throughout the region. In
addition, we will discourage destabilizing arms sales
to regional states, especially where there is the
potential for upsetting local balances of power or
accelerating wasteful arms races. We are especially
committed to working to curb the proliferation of nu-
clear, chemical, and other weapons of mass destruc-
tion, the means to produce them, and associated long-
range delivery systems. We will confront and build
international pressure against those states that sponsor
terrorism and subversion. And we will continue to
promote a peace process designed to satisfy legitimate
Palestinian political rights in a manner consonant with
our enduring commitment to Israel's security.

In South Asia, Pakistan and India are both friends of
the United States. We applaud the return of
democracy to Pakistan and the trends of economic
liberalization in both countries. We will seek to
maintain our special relationship with our traditional
ally Pakistan, steadily improve our relations with
India, and encourage Indo—Pakistani rapprochement
and a halt to nuclear proliferation. While we
welcome the withdrawal of Soviet military forces from
Afghanistan, the massive and continuing Soviet arms
supply to the illegitimate regime in Kabul reinforces
the need for continued U.S. support to the
Mujahiddin in their quest for self—determination for
the Afghan people. We remain firmly committed to a
comprehensive political settlement as the best means
of achieving Afghan self—determination and regional
security.

Africa

Institution—building, economic development, and
regional peace are the goals of our policy in Africa.
The global trends of democracy must come to Africa
too. All these goals must be achieved if Africa is to
play its rightful role as an important factor in the
international system. Africa is a major contributor to
the world supply of raw materials and minerals and a
region of enormous human potential.

In the strategic dimension, the United States has
pressed hard throughout the 1980s for the liquidation
of all the SovieUCuban military interventions in Africa
left over from the 1970s. The New York Accords of
December, 1988, were the culmination of an eight-
year U.S. effort for peace in Angola, and independ-
ence for Namibia. As a result, Cuban forces are
departing Angola, and Namibia will become
independent on March 21st. In the Horn of Africa,
the United States has encouraged negotiated solutions
to the region's conﬂicts.

In the economic dimension, the United States will
continue to advocate reforms that eliminate wasteful
and unproductive state—owned enterprises and that
liberate the productive private sector and individual
initiative. The United States has significantly increased
the assistance it provides through our Development
Fund for Africa. We continue to be the biggest donor
of humanitarian aid and have helped international

13

organizations and voluntary associations to distribute
food, medicines, and other assistance.

We continue to press for a rapid and complete end to
South Africa's system of apartheid. We support negoti-
ations leading to a democratic, non—racial South Africa
that would enhance long—term stability in the country

14

and the region. We are encouraged by the progress
that has been made, particularly the release of Nelson
Mandela and the unbanning of political organizations.
We look to all parties to continue to take the steps
necessary to create a climate in which productive
negotiations can take place.

IV. Relating Means to Ends:

Our Political Agenda

The elements of our national power—diplomatic and
political, economic and military—remain formidable.
Yet, the relative importance of these different
instruments of policy will change in changing
circumstances. Our most difficult decisions will
include not only which military forces or programs to
adjust, increase, reduce or eliminate, but also which
risks can be ameliorated by means otherthan military
capabi|ity—means like negotiations, burdensharing,
economic and security assistance, economic leverage,
and political leadership.

In a new era, we foresee that our military power will
remain an essential underpinning ofthe global bal-
ance, but less prominently and in different ways. We
see that the more likely demands forthe use of our
military forces may not involve the Soviet Union and
may be in the Third World, where new capabilities
and approaches may be required. We see that we
must look to our economic well-being as the
foundation of our long—term strength. And we can see
that, especially in the new international environment,
political will and effective diplomacy can be what
translates national power into the achievement of
national objectives. While this Report necessarily
describes these different elements of policy separately,
national strategy must integrate them and wield them
according to a coherent vision.

Alliance Relationships

Our first priority in foreign policy remains solidarity
with our allies and friends. We have never been able
to "go it alone", even in the early days of the Cold War
when our major allies were still suffering from the
devastation and exhaustion of World War II. Even to

attempt to do so would alter our way of life and
national institutions and would jeopardize the very
values we are seeking to protect.

The rise of other centers of power in the free world is
therefore welcome, consistent with America's values,
and supportive of our national interests. We must
ensure that free nations continue to recognize the
fundamental moral, political, and security interests we
have in common and protect those interests against
both the residual threat of Soviet military power and
the emerging threats of regional conflict and of
divisive economic issues. We are prepared to share
more fully with our allies and friends the
responsibilities of global leadership.

Arms Control

Arms control is a means, not an end; it is an
important component of a broader policy to enhance
national security. We will judge arms control
agreements according to several fundamental criteria:

- First, agreements must add to our security. Our
objective is to reduce the incentives, even in crisis,
to initiate an attack. Thus, we seek-not reductions
for reductions’ sake, but agreements that will
promote stability. We will work to reduce the
capabilities most suited for offensive action or pre-
emptive strike.

- Second, to enhance stability, we favor agreements
that lead to greater predictability in the size, nature,
and evolution of military forces. Predictability
through openness expands the traditional focus of.
arms control beyond just military capabilities and
addresses the fear of aggressive intent.

15

' Third, agreements are effective only if we can
verify compliance. As we broaden our agenda to
include issues like chemical and missile
proliferation, verification will become an
increasingly difficult challenge, but effective
verification will still be required. We want
agreements that can endure.

' Finally, since the security of the United States is
indivisible from that of its friends and allies, we
will insist that any arms control agreements not
compromise allied security.

The arms control accomplishments of the past twelve
months are impressive. We have already reached a
number of new agreements with the Soviet Union on:

' prevention of dangerous military activities;
' advance notification of strategic exercises;

' clarification of the rights of innocent passage in
territorial seas;

' a memorandum of understanding implementing
verification provisions of the INF Treaty;

' trial verification and stability measures for Strategic
Arms Reduction Talks (START);

' reciprocal demonstrations of each side's proposed
procedures for verifying re—entry vehicles on
ballistic missiles;

' reciprocal exhibitions of strategic bombers to aid
verification; and

' demonstrations of proposed "unique identifiers" or
"tags" for ballistic—missile verification.

These are but the beginning. Our arms control agenda
is now broader than ever—beyond the traditional East-
West focus on nuclear weapons. We are dealing with
pressing multilateral arms control issues. We are also
negotiating for greater transparency and for limits on
conventional arms. We will negotiate in good faith,
patiently and seriously, but we will not seek agree-
ment for agreement's sake, nor compromise the basic
principles set forth above.

16

Strategic A rms Reduction Talks
(START)

In START, our goals are not merely to reduce forces
but to reduce the risk of nuclear war and create a
more stable nuclear balance. Our proposals are
designed to strengthen deterrence by reducing and
constraining in particular those strategic nuclear forces
which pose the greatest threat—namely, ballistic
missiles, especially large ICBMs with multiple
warheads. We propose less strict limits on bombers
and cruise missiles, which are not capable of carrying
out a disarming first strike. Our goal is to resolve all
substantive START issues by the June 1990 Summit.

Defense and Space

Our approach to this set of issues, as well, is to
enhance strategic stability by facilitating a cooperative
transition to a stable balance of offensive and
defensive forces if effective defenses prove feasible.
We also seek greater transparency and predictability
in approaches to strategic defense, and have proposed
regular exchanges of data, briefings, visits to
laboratories, and observations of tests.

Conventional A rmed Forces in Europe
(CFE)

The United States is firmly committed to reaching an
agreement to reduce conventional armed forces in
Europe to lower levels in order to enhance security
and stability and to reduce the ability to launch a
surprise attack or sustain large—scale offensive
operations. Our goal is to complete the CFE Treaty as
soon as possible this year. In my State of the Union
speech, in response to rapid changes in Europe, I
proposed to lower substantially the levels of U.S. and
Soviet ground and air force personnel in Central and
Eastern Europe—to 195,000 troops. This proposal has
been accepted.

Chemical Weapons

The Conference on Disarmament in Geneva continues
to work toward a global ban of chemical weapons,
using as the basis for its negotiations the draft text
that I personally presented for the United States in
1984. It is one of my most important goals to see an
effective, truly global ban of chemical weapons—their
production and possession, as well as their use. At

the United Nations and at Malta, I made several
suggestions and challenges to speed this negotiation
to a successful conclusion, including ways that the
United States and Soviet Union can set an example to
spur achievement of a global ban. In this connection,
we and the Soviets have agreed to work together to
sign a bilateral agreement at the June 1990 Summit
that would have each side destroy substantial
quantities of its chemical weapons stocks. We must
not only deal with those states that now possess
chemical weapons, but also address the growing
proliferation of these instruments of indiscriminate
destruction.

Open Skies

An important step in achieving predictability through
openness is the Open Skies initiative I made last May,
which would allow frequent unarmed observation
flights over the territory of participating states. This
would institutionalize openness on a truly
unprecedented scale. It would achieve greater
transparency about military activities, lessen danger,
and ease tension. The NATO allies agreed in
December on a common approach for pursuing this
initiative, and foreign ministers from NATO and the
Warsaw Pact have met in Ottawa to begin negotiating
an agreement.

Confidence— and Security -B uilding
Measures

These negotiations in Vienna are another important
opportunity to enhance free world security through a
variety of measures to codify openness and
transparency in military operations and force
structures. The recently completed seminar on military
doctrine is a powerful example of how this forum can
generate valuable exchanges among high—ranking
military officers and open up new avenues of
understanding.

Nuclear Testing

The United States and the Soviet Union are on the
verge of completing new verification protocols to the
1974 Threshold Test Ban and the 1976 Peaceful Nu-
clear Explosions Treaties that should open the way to
their ratification and entry into force. The protocols—
which I expect to be signed at the June 1990

Summit—involve new, complex, and unprecedented
techniques for effective verification, including direct,
on—site measurement of explosive yield.

Proliferation

The spread of ever more sophisticated weaponry—
including chemical, biological, and nuclear
weapons—and of the missiles capable of carrying
them represents a growing danger to international
security. This proliferation exacerbates and fuels
regional tensions and complicates U.S. defense
planning. It poses ever greater dangers to U.S. forces
and facilities abroad, and possibly even to the United
States itself.

Our comprehensive approach to this problem
includes stringent controls and multilateral
cooperation designed to stop the spread of these
technologies and components. We will work to
strengthen the International Atomic Energy Agency,
the Nuclear Non—Proliferation Treaty, and the Missile
Technology Control Regime. We will also use
diplomacy and economic and security assistance to
address the underlying causes of tension or insecurity
that lead countries to seek advanced weaponry.

Naval Forces

The Soviet Union has urged that we negotiate

lj mitations on naval forces. We have rejected this pro-
posal for reasons grounded in the fundamental
realities of the free world's strategic interests.

The economics of the United States and its major
allies depend so vitally on trade, and on the security
of sea lines of communication, that we have always
defined a vital interest in freedom of the seas for all
nations. Our Navy protects that interest. Similarly,
some of our most important security relations are with
nations across the oceans. The Soviet Union, as a
power on the Eurasian land mass not dependent on
overseas trade, with interior lines of communication
to its major allies and trading partners, has no such
strategic stake. Its navy has served the purposes of
coastal defense—or of denial of our ability to defend
our vital interests. There is no symmetry here.

Nor is our naval power to be equated with the Soviet
ground—force superiority that we are determined to
reduce—a superiority that in its very nature, scope,

17

and composition has posed an offensive threat. No
navy could pose such a threat to the Soviet Union.

The Contest of Ideas and the
Nurturing of Democracy

Since the end of World War II, the United States has
developed and maintained an extensive program of
public information around the world—through U.S.
Information Agency offices at our embassies, speakers,
publications, exchange programs, cultural centers, and
numerous other activities.

A special effort has been made to reach into closed
societies with information about their countries,
factual news of the world, and insight into American
society. Primary tools for this effort are the Voice of
America, Radio Liberty, and Radio Free Europe. Their
impact has been invaluable, and has contributed
significantly to the changes now taking place in the
Soviet Union, Eastern Europe, and elsewhere.

The American message of democracy, respect for
human rights, and the free ﬂow of ideas is as crucial
and inspiring today as it was forty—five years ago. The
truth we provide remains a stimulus to openness. In
the coming decade, we will have to project American
values and protect American interests on issues of
growing global importance, such as the battle against
narcotics trafficking and the search for solutions to
international environmental problems.

An American initiative begun in the l980s—the
National Endowment for Democracy—has broken new
ground, mobilizing the private efforts of our political
parties, labor unions, businesses, educational and
other organizations in fostering the development of
democratic institutions. As democratic change
continues around the world—and is still denied in
many places—we must ensure that the message we
send and the means of delivery we use keep pace.

Economic and Security
Assistance

Our foreign assistance has traditionally supported our

18

security objectives by strengthening allies and friends,
bolstering regional security, deterring conﬂict, and
securing base rights and access.

As East—West tensions diminish, these political and
economic instruments become more centrally relevant
to an era of new challenges:

' A multipolar world, in which military factors may
recede to the background, puts a new premium on
the instrumentalities of political relations—of which
foreign assistance has been one of the most cost-
effective and valuable.

' In a new era, nurturing democracy and stability
remains a basic goal, but one now freed from its
traditional Cold War context. Foreign assistance is
an indispensable means toward this end.

' Economic and humanitarian goals—such as
promoting market—oriented structural reforms in
Eastern Europe and the developing world, or aiding
refugees and disaster victims —will also loom larger
than before. This is a responsibility we need to
share with international financial institutions and
prosperous allies, but we need to do our part.

' As regional conflicts are resolved, United Nations
peacekeeping takes on additional tasks—and will
have a claim on our support. As for those conﬂicts
that continue to fester, security assistance can re-
duce the level or likelihood of a direct U.S. role in
bolstering regional security.

' On problems such as drugs, the environment,
terrorism, or the proliferation of high—tech
weaponry, U.S. aid remains a valuable tool of
policy.

These policy instruments in our International Affairs
budget have always struggled for survival in the
congressional budget process. Low funding and
excessive earmarking and conditionality have
hampered ﬂexibility. In the 1990s, we will need to do
justice to the growing needs of the emerging East
European democracies without validating the fears of
our Third World friends that they will be relegated to
second place. A national security strategy that takes us
beyond containment needs these tools more than
ever.

Military Openness

In addition to the confidence-building measures
discussed above, our policy seeks other ways of
changing East—West military relations toward our goal
of greatertransparency. A prudent program of
military-to-military contacts can demonstrate the
capabilities of our forces while allowing us greater
access to and understanding of the military
establishments of potential adversaries. This can re-
duce worst-case planning based on limited
information and reduce the likelihood of
miscalculation or dangerous military incidents.

As the Soviet political system evolves, we hope that
Soviet military power will increasingly be subject to

detailed and searching public debate. In the long
term, a Soviet military that mustjustify its size,
mission, and resource demands to the Soviet public
and legislature will find it more difficult to enhance
its capabilities beyond the legitimate needs of de-
fense. Increased contact with the armed forces of the
United States and other democracies can aid this
process as well as contribute to greater understanding.
We will continue to pursue the kinds of contacts first
agreed to by Admiral Crowe and Marshal
Akhromeyev in 1988. We will also pursue similar
exchanges with the armed forces of Eastern European
states. In addition to their obvious contributions to
transparency, such contacts will support our overall
approach to Eastern Europe by helping the military
officers of these states establish a professional identity
independent of their roles in the Warsaw Pact.

19

V. Relating Means to Ends:
Our Economic Agenda

America's national power continues to rest on the
strength and resilience of our economy. To retain a
position of international leadership, we need not only
skilled diplomacy and strong military forces, but also
a dynamic economic base with competitive
agricultural and manufacturing sectors, an innovative
research establishment, solid infrastructure, secure
supplies of energy, and vibrant financial and service
industries.

We will pursue a strategy that integrates domestic
economic policies with a market-opening trade policy,
enhanced cooperation among the major industrial
countries, and imaginative solutions to the problems
of the Third World.

Global imbalances

Japan and Germany continue to run substantial trade
and current account surpluses; the United States has
large deficits. Recent economic summits and meetings
of finance ministers of the Group of Seven (G-7) have
given high priority to reducing these imbalances. For
deficit countries like the United States, this requires
action to reduce budget deficits and encourage private
savings. The surplus countries like Germany and Japan
should, fortheir part, pursue macro-economic policies
and structural reforms to encourage non-inflationary
growth. Through the G-7 and economic summits, we
will strengthen coordination and ensure
implementation of appropriate policies for non-
inflationary growth and expanded trade.

Debt

Aggregate Third World debt is over $1 trillion, and
debtor nations need some $70 billion just to meet
annual interest payments. It is a tremendous burden
on struggling democracies and on the ability of many
friendly countries to maintain their security. Relatively
slow world growth, growing inflation, rising
unemployment, and the failure to implement
necessary economic reforms aggravate an already diffi-
cult situation. We have advanced, in the Brady Plan,
suggestions to revitalize the international debt strategy
through reductions in commercial bank debt and debt
service payments, as a complement to new lending.
The International Monetary Fund and the World Bank
will provide financial support forthese efforts. As an
essential first step in obtaining this support, we are
urging debtors to adopt medium-term economic
programs—inc|uding measures to strengthen domestic
savings, steps to attract foreign investment, and
policies that promote the return of flight capital.

Trade

Support within the United States for free trade has
weakened as a result of persistently high trade deficits.
Additional concern about the competitiveness of the
U.S. economy has led to increased calls for
government intervention in support of key sectors.
Current account and trade deficits are macroeconomic

21

phenomena that primarily reflect domestic savings
and investment. The imbalance between the U.S.
saving rate and the higher U.S. investment rate is,
therefore, the fundamental source of the U.S. trade
deficit. The net capital inﬂow into the United States,
which is necessary to finance the deficit, must be
matched by a corresponding increase in imports to
the United States over exports to other countries. The
key to reducing the deficit, therefore, is to increase
domestic saving, thus closing the savings—investment
gap and reducing import demand. We have proposed
a comprehensive Savings and Economic Growth Act
to raise household savings which will help to restore
necessary balance in the trade and current accounts.

While addressing the domestic causes for the trade
deficit, we must also ensure that market forces are
free to operate at home and abroad, and that trade
expands—rather than closing our markets. In this re-
gard, we will work with other members of GATT to
bring to a successful conclusion this year the Uruguay
Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations now
addressing issues crucial to our interests, including
agricultural subsidies, services, the protection of
intellectual property, trade—related investment
measures, and market access. These are the trade
problems of the 1990s that require solution if we are
to maintain a domestic consensus in support of free
and open trade.

Given the continuing strategic importance of unity

among the industrial —democracies, it is essential that
trade disputes be resolved equitably, without tearing
the fabric of vital political and security partnerships.

Technology

Our economic and military strength rests on our
technological superiority, not sheer manufacturing
might. The United States remains in the forefront in
the development of new technologies, but American
enterprises must respond more quickly in their
exploitation of new technologies if they are to
maintain their competitiveness in both domestic and
foreign markets. The loss of advanced production
capabilities in key industries could place our
manufacturing base in jeopardy.

22

The dynamics of the technological revolution
transcend national boundaries. The transfer of
technology between allies and friends has benefitted
the United States in both national security and
economic terms. Open markets and open investment
policies will best ensure that scarce resources are
used efficiently and that benefits are widely shared.
But the openness of the free market economy must
not be exploited to threaten our security. With our
partners in the Coordinating Committee for
Multilateral Export Controls (COCOM), we must
continue to work to ensure that militarily sensitive
technology does not ﬂow to potential adversaries. At
the same time, we must adapt the procedures and
lists of COCOM—controlled goods to support rapid
political and economic change in Eastern Europe. In
that regard, our task is threefold: (a) streamline
COCOM controls on strategic goods and
technologies; (b) harmonize and tighten national
licensing and enforcement procedures; and (c)
encourage greater cooperation with non—COCOM
developing countries. We have also initiated a
comprehensive analysis of the changing strategic
threat, which will be instrumental in deciding on
possible further changes in the multilateral system of
strategic export controls.

Energy

Secure supplies of energy are essential to our
prosperity and security. The concentration of 65
percent of the world's known oil reserves in the
Persian Gulf means we must continue to ensure
reliable access to competitively priced oil and a
prompt, adequate response to any major oil supply
disruption. We must maintain our Strategic Petroleum
Reserve at a level adequate to protect our economy
against a serious supply disruption. We will continue
to promote energy conservation and diversification of
oil and gas sources, while expanding our total supply
of energy to meet the needs of a growing economy.
We must intensify efforts to promote alternative
sources of energy (nuclear, natural gas, coal, and
renewables), and devote greater attention to reducing
fossil fuel emissions in light of growing environmental
concerns.

VI. Relating Means to Ends:

Our Defense Agenda

One reason for the success of America's grand strategy
of containment has been its consistency. The military
component of that strategy has been adjusted to
changing threats and available military technology, but
there too substantial continuity remains:

- Deterrence: Throughout the postwar period we have
deterred aggression and coercion against the United
States and its allies by persuading potential adver-
saries that the costs of aggression, either nuclear or
conventional, would exceed any possible gain.
"Flexible response" demands that we preserve
options for direct defense, the threat of escalation,
and the threat of retaliation.

- Strong Alliances: Shared values and common
security interests form the basis of our system of
collective security. Collective defense arrangements
allow us to combine our economic and military
strength, thus lessening the burden on any one
country.

- Forward Defense: In the postwar era, the defense of
these shared values and common interests has
required the forward presence of significant
American military forces in Europe, in Asia and the
Pacific, and at sea. These forces provide the
capability, with our allies, for early, direct defense
against aggression and serve as a visible reminder
of our commitment to the common effort.

- Force Projection: Because we have global security
interests, we have maintained ready forces in the
United States and the means to move them to
reinforce our units forward deployed orto project
power into areas where we have no permanent
presence. For the threat of protracted conflict we
have relied on the potential to mobilize the
manpower and industrial resources of the country.

These elements have been underwritten by advanced
weaponry, timely intelligence, effective and verifiable
arms control, highly qualified and trained personnel,
and a system for command and control that is
effective, survivable, and enduring. Together they have
formed the essence of our defense policy and military
strategy during the postwar era.

The rebuilding ofAmerica's military strength during
the past decade was an essential underpinning to the
positive change we now see in the international
environment. Our challenge now is to adapt this
strength to a grand strategy that looks beyond
containment, and to ensure that our military power,
and that of our allies and friends, is appropriate to the
new and more complex opportunities and challenges
before us.

Overall Priorities

From the weapons, forces, and technologies that will
be available, we will have to pick carefully those that
best meet our needs and support our strategy in a
new period. Our approach will include the following
elements:

- Deterrence of nuclear attack remains the
cornerstone of U.S. national security. Regardless of
improved U.S.—Soviet relations and potential arms
control agreements, the Soviets’ physical ability to
initiate strategic nuclear warfare against the United
States will persist and a crisis or political change in
the Soviet Union could occur fasterthan we could
rebuild neglected strategic forces. A START
agreement will allow us to adjust how we respond
to the requirements of deterrence, but tending to
those requirements remains the first priority of our
defense strategy.

23

- As we'and our allies adjust our military posture,
each should emphasize retaining those roles it is
uniquely or better able to fulfill. For the United
States, these include nuclear and space forces,
advanced technologies, strategic mobility, a
worldwide presence, power projection, and a
secure mobilization base.

- As a country separated from many of its allies and
areas of interest by vast distances, we will ensure
we have those forces needed to control critical sea
and air lines of communication in crisis and war.

- U.S. technological superiority has long been a
powerful contributor to deterrence. To retain this
edge, we will sustain our investment in research
and development as an important hedge against an
uncertain future.

- We remain committed to the doctrine of
competitive strategies. I reaffirm the wisdom of
exploiting American strengths in a systematic way,
moving Soviet investment into areas that threaten
us less or negating systems that threaten us most.

- Defense investment faces a dual challenge: to
maintain sufficient forces to deter general war while
also giving us forces that are well suited for the
more likely contingencies of the Third World.
Many defense programs contribute significantly in
both environments but, where necessary, we will
develop the weaponry and force structure needed
for the special demands of the Third World even if
it means that some forces are less optimal for a
conﬂict on the European central front.

- As we make fundamental changes in our military
forces, we will preserve a capacity for reversibility.
This will affect decisions on a variety of issues and
may, in the short run, reduce the amount of savings
we might otherwise see. But it is a prudent hedge
against future uncertainty, which it is my moral and
constitutional duty to provide.

Deterring Nuclear War

Strategic Offensive Forces

The Soviet Union continues to modernize its strategic
forces across the board. Even as START promises to
reduce numbers substantially, the qualitative
competition has not ended.

24

Decisions on strategic modernization that I have
already made take advantage of the most promising
technologies in each leg of our Triad to increase
stability. The B-2 bomber will ensure our ability to
penetrate Soviet defenses and fulfill the role the
bomber force has played so successfully for forty
years. The D—5 missile in Trident submarines will
exploit the traditionally high survivability of this leg
and add a significant ability to attack more hardened
targets. In a two—phase program for our ICBM force,
the deployment of the Rail Garrison System will
enhance stability by removing Peacekeeper missiles
from vulnerable silos and providing the mobile
capability we need for the near term. In the second
phase, deployment of the small ICBM road—mobile
system will further strengthen stability and increase
force ﬂexibility.

While we will ensure that each leg of the Triad is as
survivable as possible, the existence of all three
precludes the destruction of more than one by
surprise attack and guards against a technological
surprise that could undermine a single leg.

Strategic Defenses

Flexible response and deterrence through the threat of
retaliation have preserved the security of the United
States and its allies for decades. Looking to the future,
the Strategic Defense Initiative offers an opportunity to
shift deterrence to a safer and more stable basis
through greater reliance on strategic defenses. In a
new international environment, as ballistic—missile
capabilities proliferate, defense against third—country
threats also becomes an increasingly important
benefit.

The deterrent value of strategic defenses derives from
the effect they would have on an adversary's calcula-
tions. Even an initial deployment would inﬂuence an
attacker's calculation by diminishing his confidence in
his ability to execute an effective attack. Initial strate-
gic defenses would also offer the United States and its
allies some protection should deterrence fail or in the
event of an accidental launch. Follow—on deployments
incorporating more advanced technologies could
provide progressively more capable defenses, even in
the face of countermeasures.

We continue to seek with the Soviet Union a
cooperative transition to deployed defenses and

reductions in strategic offensive arms. Strategic
defenses can protect our security against possible
violations of agreements to reduce strategic offensive
weapons.

The Soviets have stated that they are no longer
making completion and implementation ofa START
treaty contingent on a Defense and Space Agreement
restricting SDI. A START Treaty should stand on its
own merits and we will preserve our right to conduct
SDI activities consistent with the Anti-Ballistic Missile
(ABM) Treaty and our option to deploy SDI when it is
ready. And we will use the Defense and Space Talks
to explore a cooperative and stable transition to a
greater reliance on stability-enhancing, cost-effective
strategic defenses.

Theater Nuclear Forces

The Atlantic Alliance has consistently followed the
principle of maintaining survivable and credible thea-
ter nuclear forces to ensure a robust deterrent, to
execute its agreed strategy of flexible response—and
to "couple" European defense to the strategic nuclear
guarantee ofthe United States. At the same time, we
have always pursued a nuclearforce that is as small
as is consistent with its tasks and objectives. Indeed,
NATO has unilaterally reduced its theater nuclear
weapons by over one-third during the past decade—
over and above the entire class of U.S. and Soviet
nuclear weapons eliminated by the INF Treaty. As
requirements change, we will continue to ensure that
our posture provides survivability and credibility at
the lowest possible levels. The United States believes
that forthe foreseeable future, even in a new
environment of reduced conventional forces and
changes in Eastern Europe, we will need to retain
modern nuclearforces in-theater.

Command, Control and
Communications

Another basic element of deterrence is the security of
our command and control, enhancing the certainty of
retaliation. In addition, we maintain programs to
ensure the continuity of constitutional government—
another way of convincing a potential attacker that
any attempted "decapitating" strike against our
political and military leadership will fail.

Deterring Conventional War

It is clearthat the United States must retain the full
range of conventional military capabilities,
appropriately balanced among combat and support
elements, U.S.- and forward-based forces, active and
reserve components. We must also maintain properly
equipped and well trained general purpose and
special operations forces. Within these requirements,
as we look to the future, we see our active forces
being smaller, more global in their orientation, and
having a degree of agility, readiness and sustainability
appropriate to the demands of likely conflicts.

Forward Defense through Forward
Presence

American leadership in the postwar world and our
commitment to the forward defense of our interests
and those of our allies have been underwritten by the
forward presence of U.S. military forces. We have
exerted this presence through forces permanently
stationed abroad; through a network of bases,
facilities, and logistics arrangements; and through the
operational presence provided by periodic patrols,
exercises, and visits of U.S. military units. Clearly, the
mix of these elements will change as our perception
of the threat changes, as technology improves the
capabilities and reach of our military forces, and as
allies assume greater responsibilities in our common
efforts. But our forward presence will remain a critical
part of our defense posture for the foreseeable future.
Our overseas bases serve as an integral part of our
alliances and foster cooperation against common
threats. There is no better assurance ofa U.S. security
commitment than the presence of U.S. forces.

There are growing pressures for change in our global
deployments, however. Some are caused by concerns
at home over an inequitable sharing of the defense
burden, and others in host countries emanate from
nationalism, anti-nuclear sentiment, environmental
and social concerns and honestly divergent interests.
Operational restrictions on ourforces overseas are
also increasing, some of which we can accommodate
with new training and technologies, but others of
which may eventually reduce the readiness of our
deployed units.

25

In Europe:the overall level and specific contribution
of U.S. forces are not etched in stone, but we will
maintain forces in Europe—ground, sea and air,
conventional and nuclear—for as long as they are
needed and wanted, as I have pledged. Our forces in
Europe contribute in many ways to stability and
security. They are not tied exclusively to the size of
the Soviet presence in Eastern Europe, but to the
overall Alliance response to the needs of security. For
the foreseeable future, we believe a level of 195,000
U.S. troops in Central Europe is appropriate for
maintaining stability after a CFE reduction.

We also recognize that the presence of our forces
creates burdens that are part of the overall sharing of
effort within the Alliance. Consistent with the
demands of readiness, we will work to adjust our
training and other activities to ease the burden they
impose.

Outside of Europe, we will maintain the ability to re-
spond to regional crises, to support our commitments,
and to pursue our security interests. Within that
policy, adjustments in our overseas presence will be
made. Yet—even as the total number of U.S. forward-
deployed forces is reduced—we will work to preserve
a U.S. presence where needed. And, where
appropriate, we will work to ensure continued access
to facilities that will permit a prompt return of U.S.
forces should they be required. As we negotiate for
the use of overseas bases, we will also proceed from
the realistic premise that no base is irreplaceable.
While some are preferred more than others, each
makes a limited contribution to our strategy.

Sharing the Responsibilities of
Collective Defense

The success of our postwar strategy has enabled allied
and friendly nations’ economies and societies to
ﬂourish. We now look to them to assume a greater
share in providing for our common security. Our
efforts in this regard will be integrated with our plans
for future force structure, weapons modernization, and
arms control. Above all, they must not be—nor be
perceived to be—a cover for "burden shedding".

Our deliberations will be less about different ways to
calculate defense burdens and more about increasing
overall capabilities. One promising approach is a
greater commitment to national specialization, an

26

improved intra—alliance division of labor based on the
comparative advantages of different allies in different
defense activities. Such an approach could reduce the
impact of budget constraints being felt by us all.
Significant adjustments in missions and national force
structures may be possible as part of major negotiated
force reductions, such as those envisioned by CFE.
The overall destruction of equipment and the
possibility of "cascading" newer items from one
Alliance member to another (while destroying older,
less capable models) may give us opportunities for
greater efficiencies and new forms of Alliance
cooperation. These are complex issues, however, and
any steps will have to be sensitive to issues of
national sovereignty and based on an Alliance—wide
consensus.

As a part of burdensharing, the United States will
continue to ask our economically stronger allies to
increase aid to other Alliance members and to
friendly Third World countries. As another element of
burdensharing, the United States will work with allies
to broaden the regional role of our forward—deployed
forces. This will help us deal with the challenge of
maintaining sufficient forces for local defense and the
forces for likely contingencies elsewhere—a challenge
that will grow as defense resources become more
constrained. In support of this objective, we will make
forward—deployed forces more mobile and ﬂexible so
they can assume broader regional responsibilities in
addition to deterring attack in the country in which
they are located.

Forces for the Third World

Since World War II, the threat posed by the Soviet
Union has dominated much of our planning for the
Third World. But we have also worked to preserve
peace and build democracy and we have long
identified specific interests independent of a Soviet
factor. In the future, we expect that non—Soviet threats
to these interests will command even greater attention.

To the degree possible, we will support allied and
friendly efforts rather than introduce U.S. forces.
Nonetheless, we must retain the capability to act ei-
ther in concert with our allies or, if necessary,
unilaterally where our vital interests are threatened.

The growing technological sophistication of Third
World conﬂicts will place serious demands on our
forces. They must be able to respond quickly, and

appropriately, as the application of even small
amounts of power early in a crisis usually pays
significant dividends. Some actions may require
considerable staying power, but there are likely to be
situations where American forces will have to succeed
rapidly and with a minimum of casualties. Forces will
have to accommodate to the austere environment,
immature basing structure, and significant ranges often
encountered in the Third World. The logistics "tail" of
deployed forces will also have to be kept to a
minimum, as an overly large American presence
could be self—defeating. These capabilities will
sometimes be different from those of a force
optimized for a conﬂict in Europe, and—as our
understanding of the threat there evolves—we will
make the necessary adjustments.

We will also try to involve other industrial
democracies in preventing and resolving Third World
conﬂicts. Some of our Atlantic allies have strong
political, economic, cultural, and military ties with
Third World countries, and Japan provides
considerable sums of aid. Their role will become
even more important in the future.

The Mobilization Base

The United States has never maintained active forces
in peacetime adequate for all the possible
contingencies we could face in war. We have instead
relied on reserve forces and on a pool of manpower
and industrial strength that we could mobilize to deal
with emergencies beyond the capabilities of our
active units.

For almost two decades, our Total Force policy has
placed a significant portion of our total military power
in a well—equipped, well—trained, and early—mobilizing
reserve component. Various elements of that policy—
the balance between active and reserve forces, the
mix of units in the two components, the nature of
missions given reserve forces—are likely to be
adjusted as we respond to changes in the security
environment. Reserve forces are generally less
expensive to maintain than their active counterparts
so, as we adjust force structures, retaining reserve
units is one alternative for reducing costs while still
hedging against uncertainties. It is an alternative we
must thoroughly explore, especially as we better
understand the amount of warning time we can
expect for a major conﬂict.

A credible industrial mobilization capability
contributes to deterrence and alliance solidarity by
demonstrating to adversaries and friends alike that we
are able to meet our commitments. While important
progress has been made in recent years, more can be
done to preserve our ability to produce the weapons
and equipment we need. Mobilization plans will also
have to reﬂect our changing understanding of warning
for a global war and develop graduated responses that
will themselves signal U.S resolve and thus contribute
to deterrence.

Chemical Warfare

Our primary goal is to achieve an effective, truly
global ban on chemical weapons as soon as possible.
Until such a ban is achieved, the United States will
retain a small but effective chemical weapons
stockpile to deter the use of chemical weapons
against us and our allies. We will also continue our
initiatives to protect our forces from chemical agents
that could be used against them and to minimize the
impact of being forced to operate in a chemical
environment.

We will never use chemical weapons first, but only in
retaliation for their use against us. For as long as we
retain a chemical weapons deterrent, we will ensure
that it is as safe and effective as possible.

Space

The United States remains committed to the
exploration and use of space for peaceful purposes
and the benefit of all mankind, but international law
and this commitment allow for activities to protect our
national security. Our objectives for space mirror

those which we have long held for the sea—to ensure
free access for all in time of peace, but to be able to
deny access to our enemies in time of war.

Our space activities will help deter and, if necessary,
defend against enemy attack. We will maintain
assured access to space and negate, if necessary, hos-
tile space systems. We will develop, acquire, and
deploy systems for communications, navigation,
environmental monitoring, early warning, surveillance,
and treaty verification.

27

We will ‘also pursue scientific, technological, and
economic benefit—including encouraging private
sector investment. We will promote international
cooperative activities and work with others to
maintain freedom in space.

We remain dedicated to expanding human presence
and activity beyond earth orbit and into the solar
system. In July I committed the United States to return
to the moon, this time to stay, and continue with a
journey to Mars. The first step in this bold program to
strengthen our position of space leadership will be
completion of Space Station Freedom in the 1990s.

I chartered the National Space Council, chaired by
Vice President Quayle, to develop national space
policy, advise me on space matters, and ensure that
policy guidance is carried out. I have also asked the
Vice President, as Chairman of the Council, to assess
the feasibility of international cooperation in human
exploration. Equally important, I announced our
commitment to use space to address critical
environmental problems on earth. The new Mission to
Planet Earth program, a major part of a
comprehensive research effort, will use space
platforms to gatherthe data we need to determine
what changes are taking place in the global
environment.

The National Space Council also provides a high-level
focus for commercial space issues. Consistent with
national security and safety, an expanding private
sector role in space can generate economic benefits
forthe nation.

Low-Intensity Conflict

Even as the threat of East—West conflict may be
diminishing in a new era, lower-order threats like
terrorism, subversion, insurgency, and drug trafficking
are menacing the United States, its citizenry, and its
interests in new ways.

Low-intensity conflict involves the struggle of
competing principles and ideologies below the level
of conventional war. Poverty and the lack of political
freedoms contribute to the instability that breeds such
conflict. Our response must address these underlying
conditions—but we cannot accept violence against

28

our interests, or even less against innocent civilians,
as a legitimate instrument of anyone's policy. Nor can
the ideals of democracy, freedom, or economic
progress be nurtured except in an environment of
security.

It is the primary responsibility of friendly nations to
protect their own interests. Our security assistance
programs are a crucial tool with which we can help
them help themselves. In some cases, security
assistance ought to assume the same priority as
resources devoted to our own forces.

It is not possible to prevent or deter conflict at the
lower end of the conflict spectrum in the same way
or to the same degree as at the higher. American
forces therefore must be capable of dealing effectively
with the full range of threats, including insurgency
and terrorism. Special Operations Forces have
particular utility in this environment, but we will also
pursue new and imaginative ways to apply flexible
general purpose forces to these problems. We will
improve the foreign language skills and cultural
orientation of our armed forces and adjust our
intelligence activities to better serve our needs. Units
with unique capabilities in this environment will
receive increased emphasis. Training and research and
development will be better attuned to the needs of
low-intensity conflict.

Drug Trafficking

The Department of Defense, as noted earlier, has an
important role to play in our National Drug Control
Strategy in coordination with the Department of State
and law enforcement agencies.

The first line of defense against the illegal flow of
drugs is at the source—in those countries where illicit
drugs are produced and processed before being sent
to the United States and other countries. Our policy is
to strengthen the political will and institutional
capability of host-country military, judicial, and law
enforcement agencies. Training and material
assistance help improve tactical intelligence and the
ability to conduct airmobile and riverine operations.
Security assistance also provides host countries with
the resources needed to confront the insurgency
threats that often are endemic to narcotics-producing
regions.

A second line of defense involves the deployment of
appropriate elements of the U.S. Armed Forces with
the primary role of detecting and monitoring the
transportation of drugs to the U.S. border. The
Secretary of Defense has directed several regional
commanders to support these objectives with their
own programs and operations. As a high priority, our
military counter—narcotics deployments will focus on
the ﬂow of drugs—especially cocaine—across the
Caribbean, Central America, and Mexico toward the
southern border of the United States. These
deployments will support U.S. law enforcement
agencies in their efforts to apprehend traffickers and
seize drug shipments.

Our military and foreign intelligence activities must
be coordinated with our own and host-country law
enforcement agencies to identify air and maritime
smuggling vessels as well as the networks that
facilitate and manage illicit drug trafficking. This
cooperation and coordination must be extended to
the operational level to ensure timely and effective
interdiction.

Current efforts are already bearing fruit. Our
assistance to the Colombian government has aided its
courageous campaign to strike back at the drug lords
and to reestablish national sovereignty and the rule of
law. The cocaine industry in the Andean region has
been disrupted, and sustained pressure and
cooperation will erode the strength of the drug
trafficking organizations. The United States is
committed to such a sustained international effort.

Intelligence Programs

The extraordinary changes taking place in the world
are posing an almost unprecedented challenge to our
intelligence assets and programs.

The changes in East—West relations point to a more
peaceful future. But—after four decades of
confrontation—achieving mutual trust will be a diffi-
cult task of confidence-building and verification. A
time of transition can also be a time of turbulence. It
will be critical that we be well informed of events
and intentions in the Soviet Union, Eastern Europe,
and elsewhere.

In a new period, intelligence must also focus on new
issues. Within.the Communist world, for example,
economic questions take on new importance. As
economic forces are the impetus for many of the
military and political changes taking place there,
economic change can be a valuable gauge of how
much real change is occurring. The extent to which
Soviet leaders actually shift resources from military

to civilian uses, for example, will be an important
strategic indicator.

In contrast to the hopeful trends in the Soviet Union
and Eastern Europe, there are danger signs
elsewhere—as this Report has noted. The proliferation
of nuclear, chemical, and other military technologies
raises the risks of conﬂict and crisis. Regional conﬂicts
continue to fester. U.S. intelligence must monitor such
developments and provide policymakers with the
information needed to protect American interests.

The twin scourges of international terrorism and
narcotics trafficking also pose very high—priority, but
non—traditional, intelligence requirements. We will
also have to adapt to a new emphasis on broader
global economic and trade issues. We must be more
fully aware of such subjects as foreign trade policies,
economic trends, and foreign debt.

U.S. counterintelligence must be responsive to a
changing hostile intelligence threat. Historically,
foreign governments—and to some extent foreign
businesses—have tried to obtain our secrets and
technologies. Hostile intelligence efforts are not likely
to decrease in the near term, and they may actually
increase as barriers to Contact come down.

U.S. intelligence must still be the "alarm bell" to give
us early warning of new developments and new
dangers even as requirements grow in number and
complexity. Our intelligence capabilities must be
ready to meet new challenges, to adapt as necessary,
and to support U.S. policy in the 1990s.

Planning for the Future

United States military planning in the postwar era has
been dominated by the need to deter and be able to
defend against overwhelming Warsaw Pact
conventional forces in Europe. As this Report has
described, this heretofore dominant reality is

29

undergoing significant change, both through Soviet
and other Warsaw Pact unilateral reductions and
through negotiated agreements. This prospect is
clearly affecting our military planning.

Such planning need not and cannot await the entry

into force of arms reduction treaties. We will not act
merely on the promise of change in Warsaw Pact

30

forces, but neither will we delay developing our
responses to those changes until their implementation
is upon us. We will continually review important
issues like the future demands of nuclear deterrence,
the proper role and mix of our general purpose
forces, and an improved and more effective security
assistance program.

VII. A Public Trust

As our defense efforts adapt to changing circum-
stances, our people must be confident that their
defense dollars are efficiently and effectively
supporting the cause of peace.

The Defense Management
Review

Shortly after I took office, I ordered a review of
defense management structures and practices in
orderto improve defense acquisition, to implement
the excellent recommendations of the Packard
Commission, and to manage Department of Defense
resources more effectively. Secretary Cheney
completed a preliminary report and forwarded it to
me in July, along with a commitment to implement its
findings. I subsequently forwarded the report to the
Congressional leadership, giving its recommendations
my strong personal endorsement and asking for
Congressional support in implementation.

The implementation process now underway provides
for continuous improvement in several areas of
defense management.

Reducing Overhead Costs While
Maintaining Military Strength

The Department of Defense is building a significantly
more streamlined acquisition structure with clear lines
of responsibility and authority. The Services’ systems
and materiel commands are being reorganized to
focus largely on logistics and support services. Nearly
all contract administration services, currently divided
among the Military Departments and the Defense
Logistics Agency (DLA), are being consolidated under

DLA. In addition, a Corporate Information
Management initiative is underway to develop more
efficient data processing and information systems...

Enhancing Program Performance

The Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition will
have an enhanced role and will discipline programs
through a revised and strengthened acquisition proc-
ess. Programs will have to achieve defined milestones
and satisfy specific criteria before moving to the next
phase of their development. The military departments
will create a corps of officers who will make
acquisition a full-time career. These and additional
steps will lead to a simplified acquisition structure,
run by well-trained, dedicated professionals able to
perform their work with a minimum of bureaucratic
distraction.

Reinvigorating Planning and Budgeting

The Secretary of Defense now chairs a new Executive
Committee to review overall Department policies and
permit regular and confidential exchanges on key
issues among the Department's senior leadership. In
addition, the Deputy Secretary manages a revitalized
planning, programming, and budgeting system as
Chairman of the Defense Planning and Resources
Board. V\ﬁth steps such as these, the senior leadership
in the Department is now engaged in a dynamic
planning process that will improve the linkage
between policy, strategy, programs, and budgets.

Reducing Micromanagement

The Department of Defense has begun to carve away
a bewildering maze of self-imposed regulations. A
new, streamlined set of directives will be issued this
summer in a form that permits action at the working
level, with little additional policy guidance. The

31

Secretary of Defense, with my full indorsement, has
called on Congress to work with the Administration
to review and overhaul the statutory framework for
defense acquisition and improve the process by
which Congress oversees the Department.

Strengthening the Defense Industrial
Base

The defense industrial base must be strong, and
include manufacturers that are highly ﬂexible and
technologically advanced. This will require that both
the Defense Department and industry maintain active
research programs in vital technologies. The
Department must also create incentives (and eliminate
disincentives) to invest in new facilities and
equipment as well as in research and development.
This will be especially important in an era when
overall procurements are likely to decline.

Improving the Observance of Ethical
Standards

Secretary Cheney has chartered a high-level Ethics
Council to develop ethics programs for the
Department. The Council has met and directed work
on a model ethics program, a Department—wide Ethics
Conference, and a review of existing compliance
programs. The goal is to strengthen ethical standards
within government and with industry and to create an
environment where official standards of conduct are
well understood, broadly observed, and vigorously
enforced.

The strength of this effort to improve defense
management is that it is largely a product of the
Department itself, not something forced on it from
outside. The dedicated people—both civilian and
military—who have developed the changes described
above will be the same people called upon to make
these changes work. These are not quick fixes but
fundamental shifts, "cultural" changes, that address
issues at the core of defense management. While we
are proud of the accomplishments to date, fully

32

achieving these ambitious objectives will require
several years of significant effort.

Congress and the American
People

Under our Constitution, responsibility for national de-
fense is shared between the executive and legislative
branches of our federal government. The President,
for example, is commander—in—chief, while Congress
has the power to raise and support armies and
declare war. This system of shared and separated
powers is well designed to guard against abuses of
power, but it works best in the demanding
environment of national security affairs only if there is
a spirit of cooperation between the two branches and,
indeed, a strong measure of national and bipartisan
consensus on basic policy.

I am proud of the successful examples of bipartisan
cooperation in the past year—on Central America, on
aid to Eastern Europe, on Panama, to name a few. Yet
other issues remain contentious, such as various
attempts to constrict Presidential discretion and
authority in fields ranging from covert actions to the
excessive earmarking of assistance funds. If we are to
make a successful transition to a new era, we need to
work together.

We are now in an era of rapidly changing strategic
conditions, new openings for peace, continuing
uncertainties, and new varieties of danger. We thus
face new opportunities and new problems, both of
which demand of us special qualities of leadership—
boldness, vision, and constancy. It is my responsibility
to meet that challenge, and I am prepared to meet it
in a spirit of close cooperation and consultation with
Congress. I believe there is a national consensus in
support of a strong foreign and defense policy—
perhaps broader and deeper than at any time in 25
years. Congress and the President need, more than
ever, to reﬂect that unity in their own cooperation.
We owe the American people no less.

