NATIONAL
SECURITY
STRATEGY

OF TH T
UNITED STATES

mu ‘ n H q‘EII_I.....'

F Appl-0' C17 fa: I.:—...l—)l".c release;
Ditraltrotioll Unlimited

19980513 064

DT: t

ii.TCPZCZED 4
PLEASE RETURN TO:

BMD TECHNICAL INFORMATION CENTER
BALLISTIC MISSILE DEFENSE ORGANIZATION

7100 DEFENSE PENTAGO N
WASHINGTON D.C. 20301-7100

NATIONAL

SECURITY
STRATEGY

OF THE
UNITED STATES

THE WHITE HOUSE
AUGUST 1991

PLEASE RETURN TO:
SDI TECHNICAL INFORMATION CENTER

Accession Number: 3131

Publication Date: Aug 01, 1991

Title: National Security Strategy of the United States

Corporate Author Or Publisher: The White House, Washington, DC

Descriptors, Keywords: National Strategy Defense US Soviet Coalition Proliferation Nuclear Deterrence Missile Security UN
Pages: 00034

Cataloged Date: Sep ll, 1991

Document Type: HC

Number of Copies In Library: 000001

Record ID: 22566

Contents

Preface . . . V

I.The Foundations of National
Strategy: Interests and Goals . ..1

ANEW ERA. . . 1

OUR INTERESTS AND OBJECTIVES IN THE
1990s. . . 3

II.Trends in the World Today: New
Opportunities and Concerns . . . 5

FUNDAMENTAL TRANSFORMATIONS . . .5
The Soviet Future  5
The Growing Roles of Germany and Japan  6

The New Europe  6

REGIONAL TRENDS. . . 7
The Western Hemisphere  8
East Asia and the Pacific 9
The Middle East and South Asia 10
Africa  10

III. Relating Means to Ends: A Political
Agenda for the 1990s . . . 13

ALLIANCES, COALITIONS ANDA NEW UNITED
NATIONS... I3

iii

D1TRTl3'C—170717sTATEMNT A

Approved for public re/ease.
Distribution Unlimited 5

THE CONTEST OFIDEAS AND THE NURTURING OF
DEMOCRACY... I4

ARMS CONTROL. . . 14

STEMMING PROLIFERATION. . . 15
INTELLIGENCE PROGRAMS. . . 16

ECONOMIC AND SECURITY ASSISTANCE. . . 16
ILLICITDRUGS. . . 17

IMMIGRANTS AND REFUGEES. . . 18

IV. Relating Means to Ends: An
Economic Agenda for the 1990s  19

ECONOMIC CHALLENGES. . . 19
MAINTAINING ECONOMIC GROWTH . . . 19
GLOBAL IMBALANCES. . . 20

DEBT. . .20

TRADE. . . 20

TECHNOLOGY. . . 21

ENERGY. . . 21

THE ENVIRONMENT. . . 22

SPACE. . . 22

V. Relating Means to Ends: A Defense
Agenda for the 1990s  25

NUCLEAR DETERRENCE. . . 25
Strategic Nuclear Forces  25
Non—Strategic Nuclear Forces  26

Missile Defenses  27
FORWARD PRESENCE. . . 27

Across the Atlantic: Europe and
the Middle East  27

Across the Pacific  28

The Rest of the World  28

CRISIS RESPONSE. . . 28
Mobility  28

Readiness and our Guard and Reserve Forces 29

RECONSTITUTION. .. 29

Manpower  30
Defense Technology . . . 30
The Industrial Base  30

A SMALLER AND RESTRUCTURED FORCE. . . 31

Minimum Essential Military Forces —
The Base Force  31

VI. Toward the 21st Century  33

Preface

A NEW WORLD ORDER

A new world order is not a fact; it is an aspiration —
and an opportunity. We have within our grasp an
extraordinary possibility that few generations have
enjoyed—to build a new international system in
accordance with our own values and ideals, as old pat-
terns and certainties crumble around us.

In the Gulf we caught a glimmer of a better future — a
new world community brought together by a growing
consensus that force cannot be used to settle disputes
and that when that consensus is broken, the world will
respond. In the Gulf, we saw the United Nations play-
ing the role dreamed of by its founders, with the
world's leading nations orchestrating and sanctioning
collective action against aggression. But we remain in a
period of transition. The old has been swept away, the
new not yet fully in place. The obstacles and uncertain-
ties before us are quite real — the daunting problems
confronting the hopes for reform in Eastern Europe and
the Soviet Union, trade disputes and burdensharing
debates among the industrial democracies, and the tur-
moil and dangers in the developing world.

Yet, the Gulf crisis showed what the world community
is now capable of, and in the very act of meeting that
challenge the world community strengthened itself. I
hope history will record that the Gulf crisis was the
crucible of the new world order.

It is up to us — our generation in America and the
world — to bring these extraordinary possibilities to
fruition. And in doing this, American leadership is
indispensable. That is our challenge.

Our response, outlined in this Report, is shaped by
what we are as a people, for our values are the link
between our past and our future, between our domestic
life and our foreign policy, between our power and our
purpose. It is our deepest belief that all nations and
peoples seek political and economic freedom; that gov-
ernments must rest their rightful authority on the con-
sent of the governed, and must live in peace with their
neighbors. The collapse of the Communist idea has
shown that our Vision of individual rights — a Vision
imbedded in the faith of our Founders — speaks to
humanity's enduring hopes and aspirations.

It is this abiding faith in democracy that steels us to
deal with a world that, for all our hope, remains a dan-
gerous place — a world of ethnic antagonisms, nation-
al rivalries, religious tensions, spreading weaponry, per-
sonal ambitions and lingering authoritarianism. For
America, there can be no retreat from the world's prob-
lems. Within the broader community of nations, we see
our own role clearly. We must not only protect our citi-
zens and our interests, but help create a new world in
which our fundamental values not only survive but
flourish. We must work with others, but we must also
be a leader.

Ema

I. The Foundations of National
Strategy: Interests and Goals

NEW ERA

The bitter struggle that divided the world for over two
generations has come to an end. The collapse of Soviet
domination in Eastern Europe means that the Cold War
is over, its Core issue resolved. We have entered a new
era, one whose outline would have been unimaginable
only three years ago.

This new era offers great hope, but this hope must be
tempered by the even greater uncertainty we face.
Almost immediately new crises and instabilities came
upon us. The Gulf War was a forceful reminderthat
there are still autonomous sources of turbulence in the
world. In the Soviet Union, while we have seen a
healthy retrenchment in foreign policy, we also see a
continuing internal crisis, with a danger of violence
overhanging the hopes for internal reform. We face
new challenges not only to our security, but to our
ways of thinking about security.

For over 40 years, the American grand strategy of con-
tainment has reflected an era of expanding Soviet
power, Soviet aggression and Soviet Communism. We
now find, however, that the Soviet Union is far more
inwardly focused as it wrestles with its internal crises.
We do not know what path the Soviet Union will ulti-
mately take, but a return to the same superpower
adversary we have faced for over 40 years is unlikely.

That said, the Soviet Union remains the only state pos-
sessing the physical military capability to destroy
American society with a single, cataclysmic attack and,
in spite of severe economic strains, the modernization
of Soviet strategic forces continues virtually across the
board. Even with a START Treaty, the Soviets will retain
more than 6,000 strategic weapons. The Soviets will

also — despite the heartening reductions we have seen
in their Conventional Capabilities — retain some three
million men in their armed forces. These enduring real-
ities Cannot be ignored.

Shaping a security strategy for a new era will require an
understanding of the extraordinary trends at work today
— a clear picture of what has changed and what has
not, an accurate sense of the opportunities that history
has put before us and a sober appreciation of the dan-
gers that remain.

Politically, a key issue is how America's role of alliance
leader — and indeed our alliances themselves — will
be affected, especially in Europe, by a reduced Soviet
threat. The positive common basis of our alliances —
the defense of democratic values — must be reaffirmed
and strengthened. Yet, differences among allies are like-
ly to become more evident as the traditional concern
for security that first brought them together diminishes
in intensity. We need to consider how the United States
and its allies can best respond to a new agenda of polit-
ical challenges — such as the troubled evolution of the
Soviet Union or the volatile Middle East — in the
framework of the moral and political values we contin-
ue to share.

In the realm of military strategy, we confront dangers
more ambiguous than those we previously faced. What
type and distribution of forces are needed to combat
not a particular, poised enemy but the nascent threats
of power vacuums and regional instabilities? How do
we reduce our conventional capabilities in ways that
ensure we could rebuild them faster than an enemy
could build a devastating new threat against us? How
does the proliferation of advanced weaponry affect our
traditional problem of deterrence? How should we
think about these new military challenges and what

capabilities and forces should we develop to secure
ourselves against them?

America will continue to support an international-eco-
nomic system as open and inclusive as possible, as the
best way to strengthen global economic development,
political stability and the growth of free societies. But
how can these goals best be attained, especially if they
are not completely shared by all of our economic com-
petitors? How will the end ofthe Cold War and the
increased economic strength of our major trading part-
ners influence economic, political and even security
relationships? In addition to working actively to con-
clude successfully the Uruguay Round of Multilateral
Trade Negotiations, what other market-opening objec-
tives should the United States pursue, and with whom
should we pursue them?

In the emerging post-Cold War world, international
relations promise to be more complicated, more
volatile and less predictable. Indeed, of all the mistakes
that could be made about the security challenges of a
new era, the most dangerous would be to believe that
suddenly the future can be predicted with certainty.
The history of the 20th century has been replete with
surprises, many unwelcome.

In many ways, if there is a historical analogy for today's
strategic environment, it is less the late 1940s than it is
the 1920s. In the 1920s, judging that the great threat to
our interests had collapsed and that no comparable
threat was evident, the Nation turned inward. That
course had near disastrous consequences then and it
would be even more dangerous now. At a time when
the world is far more interdependent — economically,
technologically, environmentally — any attempt to iso-
late ourselves militarily and politically would be folly.

Despite the emergence of new power centers, the
United States remains the only state with truly global
strength, reach and influence in every dimension —
political, economic and military. In these circum-
stances, our natural desire to share burdens more equi-
tably with newly-strong friends does not relieve us of
our own responsibilities.

America's role is rooted not only in power, but also in
trust. When, in the aftermath of the invasion of Kuwait,
the Saudis invited foreign forces onto their soil, King
Fand observed:

2

I trust the United States of America. I know that
when you say you will be committed, you are, in
fact, committed. I know that you will stay as long as
necessary to do what has to be done, and I know
you will leave when you are asked to leave at the
end, and that you have no ulterior motives.

We cannot be the world's policeman with responsibility
for solving all the world's security problems. But we
remain the country to whom others turn when in dis-
tress. This faith in us creates burdens, certainly, and in
the Gulf we showed that American leadership must
include mobilizing the world community to share the
danger and risk. But the failure of others to bear their
burden would not excuse us. In the end, we are
answerable to our own interests and our own con-
science — to our ideals and to history — for what we
do with the power we have. In the 1990s, as for much
of this century, there is no substitute for American lead-
ership. Our responsibility, even in a new era, is pivotal
and inescapable.

The Gulf crisis interrupted a time of hope. We saw a
new world coming, a world freer from the threat of ter-
ror, stronger in the pursuit ofjustice, more secure in the
quest for peace. Democracy was gaining ground as
were the principles of human rights and political and
economic freedom. This new world is still within reach,
perhaps brought closer by the unprecedented interna-
tional cooperation achieved in the Gulf crisis.

But even after such a success, we face not only the
complex security issues outlined above, but a new
agenda of new kinds of security issues. Our national
power, for example, ultimately rests on the strength and
resilience of our economy, and our security would be
badly served ifwe allowed fiscal irresponsibility at
home to erode our ability to protect our interests
abroad, to aid new democracies or to help find solu-
tions to other global problems. The scourge of illegal
drugs saps our vitality as a free people, diverts our ener-
gies from more positive pursuits and threatens friendly
democratic governments now plagued by drug traffick-
ers. The environmental depredations of Saddam
Hussein have underscored that protecting the global
ecology is a top priority on the agenda of international
cooperation — from extinguishing oil fires in Kuwait to
preserving the rain forests to solving water disputes to
assessing climate change. The upheavals of this era are
also giving rise to human migrations on an unprece-
dented scale, raising a host of social, economic, politi-
cal and moral challenges to the world's nations.

A security strategy that takes the Republic safely into
the next century will tend to these as well as to more
traditional threats to our safety and well—being.

OUR INTERESTS AND
OBJECTIVES IN THE 19908

We need, then, an approach to security broad enough
to preserve the basic sources of our national strength
and focused enough to deal with the very real threats
that still exist. Such an approach begins with an under-
standing of our basic interests and objectives, interests
and objectives that even in a new era are enduring:

The survival of the United States as a free and inde-
pendent nation, with its fundamental values intact and
its institutions and people secure.

The United States seeks, whenever possible in concert
with its allies, to:

- deter any aggression that could threaten the security
of the United States and its allies and — should
deterrence fail — repel or defeat military attack and
end conflict on terms favorable to the United States,
its interests and its allies;

- effectively counter threats to the security of the
United States and its citizens and interests short of
armed conflict, including the threat of international
terrorism;

- improve stability by pursuing equitable and verifi-
able arms control agreements, modernizing our
strategic deterrent, developing systems capable of
defending against limited ballistic-missile strikes,
and enhancing appropriate conventional capabili-
ties;

- promote democratic change in the Soviet Union,
while maintaining firm policies that discourage any
temptation to new quests for military advantage;

- foster restraint in global military spending and dis-
courage military adventurism;

- prevent the transfer of militarily critical technologies
and resources to hostile countries or groups, espe-
cially the spread of chemical, biological and nuclear
weapons and associated high-technology means of
delivery; and

- reduce the flow of illegal drugs into the United
States by encouraging reduction in foreign produc-
tion, combatting international traffickers and reduc-
ing demand at home.

A healthy and growing U.S. economy to ensure oppor-
tunity for individual prosperity and resources for
national endeavors at home and abroad.

National security and economic strength are indivisi-
ble. We seekto:

- promote a strong, prosperous and competitive U.S.
economy;

- ensure access to foreign markets, energy, mineral
resources, the oceans and space;

- promote an open and expanding international eco-
nomic system, based on market principles, with min-
imal distortions to trade and investment, stable cur-
rencies, and broadly respected rules for managing
and resolving economic disputes; and

- achieve cooperative international solutions to key
environmental challenges, assuring the sustainability
and environmental security of the planet as well as
growth and opportunity for all.

Healthy, cooperative and politically vigorous relations
with allies and friendly nations.

To build and sustain such relationships, we seekto:

- strengthen and enlarge the commonwealth of free
nations that share a commitment to democracy and
individual rights;

- establish a more balanced partnership with our allies
and a greater sharing of global leadership and
responsibilities;

- strengthen international institutions like the United
Nations to make them more effective in promoting
peace, world order and political, economic and
social progress;

- support Western Europe's historic march toward
greater economic and political unity, including a
European security identity within the Atlantic
Alliance, and nurture a closer relationship between
the United States and the European Community; and

- work with our North Atlantic allies to help develop
the processes of the Conference on Security and
Cooperation in Europe to bring about reconciliation,
security and democracy in a Europe whole and free.

A stable and secure world, where political and eco-
nomic freedom, human rights and democratic institu-
tions ﬂourish.

Our interests are best served in a world in which
democracy and its idfeals are widespread and
secure. We seek to:

- maintain stable regional nnilitary balances to deter
those powers that might seek regional dominance;

promote diplomatic solutions to regional disputes;

promote the growth of free, democratic political
institutions as the surest guarantors of both human
rights and economic and social progress;

aid in combatting threats to democratic institutions
from aggression, coercion, insurgencies, subversion,
terrorism and illicit drug trafficking; and

support aid, trade and investment policies that pro-
mote economic development and social and politi-
cal progress.

ll. Trends in The World Today: New
Opportunities and Concerns

FUNDAMENTAL
TRANSFORMA TIONS

Despite the uncertainties that remain, we see a funda-
mental transformation of the global strategic environ-
ment in several areas. Our policies and strategy for the
decade ahead must be designed to adapt to these
changes, and to shape them in ways that benefit the
United States and its friends and allies.

The Soviet Future

If Central and Eastern Europe was the scene of the
peaceful Revolution of 1989, the dramatic story of
1991 is the deepening crisis within the Soviet Union.
The old system of Communist orthodoxy is discredited,
yet its diehard adherents have not given up the struggle
against change. Fundamental choices — of multi-party
democracy, national self-determination and market
economic reform — have been postponed too long.
The economy is deteriorating. The painful process of
establishing new, legitimate political and economic
institutions has much fartherto go.

If reform is to succeed, Soviet leaders must move deci-
sively to effect institutional change. When invited and
where appropriate, we will offer our cooperation. But it
is clearly not in our interest to offer assistance in a way
that allows the Soviet government to avoid the hard
choices that in the longer run are the only hope for the
people of that country. At the July 1991 London
Economic Summit, the participants announced their
support for special associate status for the Soviet Union
in the IMF and World Bank. This will give the Soviets
access to the technical advice they need to formulate
and implement their reform program.

The processes of reform inside the Soviet Union have
already had a revolutionary impact on Soviet foreign
policy. With former ideological imperatives giving way
to a new pragmatism, areas of cooperation have
expanded. The end of Soviet domination of Eastern
Europe was a transforming event. Soviet policy toward
the unification of Germany was constructive. The
reduced role of ideology in Soviet foreign policy has
diminished the importance of many developing areas
as arenas of conflict with the West. Soviet support in
the UN Security Council for the resolutions against
Iraqi aggression was an important contribution to the
international effort. We are hopeful that such coopera-
tion can be expanded. Of course, the Soviets would
pay a severe political price for any return to practices of
an earlier era, exploiting regional disputes and instabili-
ties for their presumed advantage.

Today, the threat of a U.S.-Soviet military conflict is
lower than at any time since the end of World War II.
With the ongoing withdrawal of Soviet forces from
Eastern Europe, the unilateral reductions now under-
way and the recently signed CFE treaty (if faithfully
implemented), the threat of a sudden, massive offensive
against NATO will have been eliminated. Despite
uncertainty over the Soviet internal evolution, any
attempt by the Soviets to restore such a threat would
require lengthy preparation and be enormously costly
and virtually impossible to conceal. Moreover, the
START Treaty signed at the Moscow Summit will signifi-
cantly reduce US and Soviet strategic nuclear arsenals.

But Soviet military power is hardly becoming irrelevant.
The Soviet Union is and will remain a military super-
power. Beyond its modernized strategic arsenal, the
Soviet Union's conventional forces west of the Urals
will dwarf any other national force in Europe. While
they no longer pose the threat of a short-warning, the-

ater-wide offensive, they could still pose a potent threat
to a single flank or region. The size and orientation of
Soviet military forces must therefore remain critical
concerns to the United States and the overall health of
the European system will still require a counterweight
to Soviet military strength.

It is our responsibility as a government to hedge against
the uncertainties of the future. Elements of the U.S.-
Soviet relationship will remain competitive, and there is
always the danger that confrontations will re-emerge.
Our evolving relationship is also not immune to Soviet
attempts to lay the problems created by decades of
domestic tyranny, misrule and mismanagement at the
feet of "foreign enemies". Nor is it immune to the
implications of the forceful repression of democratic
forces, slowing the Soviet Union's progress on a road
that must be taken if it is to successfully meet the chal-
lenges before it. The internal order of a state is ultimate-
ly reflected in its external behavior. We will remain
alert to the potential strategic consequences of a return
to totalitarian policies.

The Growing Roles of
Germany and Japan

One of the most important and far-reaching strategic
developments of a new era — and a major success of
America's postwar policy — is the emergence of Japan
and Germany as economic and political leaders. The
United States has long encouraged such a develop-
ment, and our close ties with these democracies have
created the climate of reassurance necessary for their
evolution as stable and powerful countries enjoying
good relations with their neighbors. As these countries
assume a greater political role, the health of American
ties with them — political, military and economic —
will remain crucial to regional and even global stability.
These links are not relics of an earlier period. They are
all the more needed in a new era as these countries’
roles expand.

But we frequently find ourselves competitors —
sometimes even bitter competitors — in the economic
arena. These frictions must be managed if we are to
preserve the partnerships that have fostered
reconciliation, reassurance, democracy and security in
the postwar period. In this sense, ongoing trade
negotiations now share some of the strategic
importance we have traditionally attached to arms
talks with the Soviet Union.

6

The Gulf crisis has also reopened, with a new sense of
urgency, the question of responsibility—sharing — not

only with respect to sharing the costs and risks of Gulf
operations, but also with regard to sharing the costs of
U.S. forces defending Europe and Japan. Our allies are
doing more, as befits their economic strength, but the

issue may grow more acute as we and they adjust to a

l’1CW era.

The New Europe

It is Europe more than any other area that has held the
key to the global balance in this century, and it is this
continent more than any other that is experiencing fun-
damental change. The unification of Germany last
October quickened the pace to a new, more promising
era and a continent truly whole and free. As Europe is
being transformed politically, we are also lifting the
military shadows and fears with which we have lived
for nearly half a century.

All across the Continent, the barriers that once confined
people and ideas are collapsing. East Europeans are
determining their own destinies, choosing freedom and
economic liberty. One by one, the states of Central and
Eastern Europe have begun to reclaim the European
cultural and political tradition that is their heritage. All
Soviet forces are gone from Czechoslovakia and
Hungary and withdrawals from Germany and Poland
are underway. The military capability of the Soviet
forces still remaining in Eastern Europe is rapidly dimin-
ishing and the Warsaw Pact has been dissolved.

Basic to the new structure of peace we seek to build
throughout Europe is the continued vitality of the North
Atlantic Alliance — the indispensable foundation of
transatlantic cooperation. To keep the Alliance strong
and viable in a new environment we must recognize
that there are important tasks beyond the changed —
but still important — requirement to balance and deter
Soviet military power. NATO must deter and defend
against the threat of aggression from any state against
the territory of a NATO member. NATO will also be
essential in promoting a stable security environment
throughout Europe, an environment based on demo-
cratic institutions and the peaceful resolution of dis-
putes, an environment free of intimidation or attempts
at hegemony. Finally, NATO still serves as an indispens-
able transatlantic forum for consultations on issues that
affect common political and security interests.

As the European Community heads toward the new
milestone of a single market by the end of 1992, we
enter a revolution of relations in the West, perhaps ulti-
mately as important strategically as the revolution tak-
ing place in the East. It is no accident that Europeans
are contemplating greater West European cohesion in
the security field, even while preserving the vital
transatlantic framework. We will work to adapt NATO's
structures to encompass European desires for a distinct
security identity within the Alliance and we will
encourage greater European responsibility for Europe's
defense. While European governments will naturally
take the lead in developing their own institutions, these
efforts will enjoy our full support as long as they
strengthen the Alliance. We will also work to adapt
Alliance command structures to new realities — the
reassessment of risks, a new NATO strategy, a different
force structure — in ways that sustain the unique con-
tribution of NATO's integrated military command.

The continued freedom, vitality and national indepen-
dence of the new Eastern European democracies are
also critical to the new structure of peace we seek to
build throughout Europe. Any reversal of the present
positive trend in Soviet policy would have serious
implications. As the North Atlantic allies declared in
June: "Our own security is inseparably linked to that of
all other states in Europe. The consolidation and preser-
vation throughout the continent of democratic societies
and their freedom from any form of coercion or intimi-
dation are therefore of direct and material concern to
us." We and our NATO allies have established a pro-
gram of contacts with the militaries of these states to
support military establishments that will sustain newly
won freedoms and we have extended our bilateral
International Military Education and Training (IMET)
program to strengthen military professionalism and to
promote the principle of civilian oversight ofthe armed
forces.

It is i mportant that we not let euphoria over the easing
of East-West confrontation blind us to the potential
security problems within a new Europe. Historical
enmities in Western Europe have been largely con-
signed to the past but disputes between and among
some Eastern European states and ethnic groups appear
to have been merely frozen in time by decades of Cold
War. In the interwar period, the politics of these states
were often dominated by economic hardship, compet-
ing nationalisms and overlapping territorial claims. We
have reason to be more hopeful today, but security

problems could emerge in the East in the course of the
1990s. The powerful centrifugal forces in Yugoslavia
are particularly worrisome.

The overall structure of peace in Europe must be made
solid enough to withstand the turmoil that looms
ahead. We need to develop the processes and princi-
ples of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in
Europe (CSCE) and perhaps other mechanisms to ease
ethnic and national tensions and to dampen and
resolve conflicts.

Europe also may be about to face a new problem, not
new in kind, but in scope: mass migrations and flows of
refugees in response to the breakdown of the commu-
nist world and the magnetic attraction of Western
European prosperity. From the Soviet Union and
Eastern Europe, from North Africa and the Near East,
we could see thousands fleeing economic hardship and
seeking a better life. For Western European countries,
there could be enormous economic, social and politi-
cal strains — an unprecedented challenge to the new
Europe, testing its moral and political character.

REGIONAL TRENDS

While Europe remains a central strategic arena, the
Gulf crisis reminded us how much our interests can be
affected in other regions as well.

As the effects of the Cold War recede, regional disputes
are less likely automatically to be perceived as part of a
permanent — frequently dangerous, sometimes violent
— global competition, thus allowing broader interna-
tional cooperation in their resolution.

Less happily, in some regions this overall positive trend
could unleash local, destructive forces that were for-
merly kept in check. As we saw in the Gulf, there is the
danger of locally dominant powers, armed with mod-
ern weaponry and ancient ambitions, threatening the
world's hope for a new era of cooperation. We see
regimes that have made themselves champions of
regional radicalism, states that are all too vulnerable to
such pressures, governments that refuse to recognize
one another, and countries that have claims on one
another's territory — some with significant military
capabilities and a history of recurring war. A key task
forthe future will be maintaining regional balances and
resolving such disputes before they erupt in military
conflict.

lfthe end of the Cold War lives up to its promise and
liberates U.S. policy from many of its earlier concerns,
we should be able to concentrate more on enhancing
security — in the developing world, particularly —
through means that are more political, social and eco-
nomic than military. We must recognize the stark fact
that our hopeful new era still has within it dislocations
and dangers that threaten the fragile shoots of democra-
cy and progress that have recently emerged.
Malnutrition, illiteracy and poverty put dangerous pres-
sures on democratic institutions as hungry, uneducated
or poorly housed citizens are ripe for radicalization by
movements of the left and the right. Our response to
need and turmoil must increasingly emphasize the
strengthening of democracy, and a long-term invest-
ment in the development of human resources and the
structures of free markets and free governments. Such
measures are an investment in our own security as well
as a response to the demands of simple justice.

The Western Hemisphere

Nowhere is this more true than in our own
hemisphere, where ourfundamental aims are to
deepen the sense of partnership and common interest.

Latin Americans have long argued that U.S. interest has
waxed and waned with the rise and fall of extra-
hemispheric threats to regional security. Our policy has
sought to allay these fears, as it is founded on the
principle ofa common destiny and mutual
responsibility. The Western Hemisphere is all the more
significant to the United States in light of today's global
trends, political and economic.

The resurgence of democracy, the worldwide
phenomenon that is such an inspiration to us, is
heading toward a dramatic achievement — a
completely democratic hemisphere. This drive gained
momentum last year with the election of democratic
governments in Nicaragua and Haiti, the restoration of
democracy in Panama, and several other democratic
elections. The electoral defeat of the Sandinista
government in Nicaragua is especially noteworthy as it
has led to the end of Soviet and Cuban military
assistance, thereby increasing the security of all of
Central America. The United States has provided
political and economic support forthe new
government and its program for reconstruction and
long-term development. Despite these successes, we
realize that democratic institutions in much of Latin

8

America remain fragile, and we are seeking ways to
strengthen them.

In our military-to-military relations, we will continue to
promote professionalism, support for civilian authority
and respect for human rights. V\ﬁth recent legislative
changes, we can more easily include civilian officials
in our IMET program. Effective civilian control ofthe
military will become a reality only when there is a
cadre of competent civilian resource managers with
the expertise to take the lead in defense issues.

Cuba remains a holdout in the hemisphere's transition
to democracy but it is simply a matter of time before
fundamental change occurs there, too. We will
continue to press the Soviet Union to reduce its aid
and presence in Cuba and we will enlist our friends in
the hemisphere in pressing Cuba to accept the
inevitable peacefully. in Central America, we support
the regional trend toward negotiation, demilitarization
and demobilization. The nations most severely
threatened by guerrilla forces or narco-terrorists — El
Salvador, Colombia and Peru —will receive
appropriate support from the United States.

As many countries make the transition to democracy, a
strong tide of economic realism and dedication to mar-
ket-oriented reforms is also sweeping the region. Our
interest in supporting both democratic and economic
transitions in Latin America and the Caribbean is
demonstrated by the new Enterprise for the Americas
Initiative. This Initiative, which has been warmly wel-
comed in the region, sets out a vision of hemispheric
prosperity achieved through expanded trade, increased
investment, reduced debt burdens and important sup-
port for protection of the hemisphere's vital natural her-
itage. Concrete steps have been taken toward a hemi-
spheric free trade area, including work on trade and
investment framework agreements and a Free Trade
Agreement embracing both Mexico and Canada. We
are also encouraging countries to take steps to compete
for capital and are working to reduce bilateral official
debt of countries committed to strong economic
reforms. We are seeking prompt Congressional
approval ofenabling legislation. In addition, we have
proposed a specific trade preference system (patterned
afterthe successful Caribbean Basin Initiative) to help
Andean countries break out of their dependence on
illegal drug crops. We will also work with our friends to
develop the initiatives that make up the Partnership for
Democracy and Development in Central America.

East Asia and the Pacific

East Asia and the Pacific are home to some of the
world's most economically and politically dynamic
societies. The region also includes some of the last tra-
ditional Communist regimes on the face of the globe.
Regional hotspots tragically persist on the Korean
peninsula and in Cambodia, and there are territorial
disputes in which progress is long overdue, including
the Soviet Union's continued occupation of Japan's
Northern Territories.

In this complex environment, an era of Soviet adven-
turism is on the ebb, even while its effects linger. This
is placing new stresses on Vietnam, Cambodia and
North Korea as Soviet military and economic aid
declines and Moscow seeks to improve relations with
Seoul, Tokyo and other capitals. China is coming to
view its neighbors in a new light, and is gradually
adjusting to a changing perception of the Soviet threat.

Through a web of bilateral relationships, the United
States has pursued throughout the postwar period a
policy of engagement in support of the stability and
security that are prerequisites to economic and politi-
cal progress. U.S. power remains welcome in key
states in the region, who recognize the pivotal role we
continue to play in the regional balance. We remain a
key factor of reassurance and stability. By ensuring
freedom of the seas through naval and air strength and
by offering these capabilities as a counterweight in the
region's power equations, we are likely to remain wel-
come in an era of shifting patterns and possible as new
frictions.

Today's basically healthy conditions cannot be taken
for granted. We will continue to be a beacon for
democracy and human rights. We will meet our
responsibilities in the security field. We will also
remain actively engaged in promoting free and
expanding markets through Asian Pacific Economic
Cooperation, recognizing that economic progress is a
major ingredient in Asia's political stability and demo-
cratic progress.

As noted earlier, our alliance with Japan remains of
enormous strategic importance. Our hope is to see the
U.S.-Japan global partnership extend beyond its
traditional confines and into fields like refugee relief,
non-proliferation and the environment.

On the Korean peninsula, we and the Republic of
Korea seekto persuade North Korea of the benefit of
confidence-building measures as a first step to lasting
peace and reunification. We firmly believe that true
stability can only be achieved through direct North-
South talks. At the same time, the United States
remains committed to the security of the Republic of
Korea as it continues to open its economic and
political systems. We are increasingly concerned about
North Korea's failure to observe its obligations under
the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, and considerthis
to be the most pressing security issue on the peninsula.

China, like the Soviet Union, poses a complex
challenge as it proceeds inexorably toward major
systemic change. China's inward focus and struggle to
achieve stability will not preclude increasing
interaction with its neighbors as trade and technology
advance. Consultations and contact with China will be
central features of our policy, lest we intensify the
isolation that shields repression. Change is inevitable
in China, and our links with China must endure.

The United States maintains strong, unofficial,
substantive relations with Taiwan where rapid
economic and political change is underway. One of
our goals is to foster an environment in which Taiwan
and the Peoples Republic of China can pursue a
constructive and peaceful interchange across the
Taiwan Strait.

In Southeast Asia, there is renewed hope for a
settlement in Cambodia. Only through resolution of
the conflict in Cambodia can there be the promise of
our restoring normal relations with that beleaguered
nation and with Vietnam. Hanoi and Phnom Penh
have sadly delayed the day when they can enjoy
normal ties with us or their Southeast Asian neighbors.
Of course, the pace and scope of our actions will also
be directly affected by steps that are taken to resolve
the fate of Americans still unaccounted for. The
resolution of this issue remains one of our highest
priorities.

Even with the loss of Clark Air Base, we remain com-
mitted to helping the Philippines make a success of its
new democracy and to fulfilling our legitimate defense
function there as allies and equals. In the South Pacific,
we are demonstrating renewed interest in and assis-
tance for the island states. Australia retains its special
position as a steadfast ally and key Pacific partner. We

look forward to the day when New Zealand will
choose to resume its responsibilities to the ANZUS
alliance and rejoin Australia and the United States in
this important regional structure.

The Middle East and South
Asia

The reversal of Iraq's aggression against Kuwait was a
watershed event. Nonetheless, our basic policy toward
the region shows powerful continuity. American
strategic concerns still include promoting stability and
the security of our friends, maintaining a free flow of
oil, curbing the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and ballistic missiles, discouraging
destabilizing conventional arms sales, countering
terrorism and encouraging a peace process that brings
about reconciliation between Israel and the Arab states
as well as between Palestinians and Israel in a manner
consonant with our enduring commitment to Israel's
security.

The regional environment since Desert Storm presents
new challenges and new opportunities. Even as we
provide badly needed relief and protection to refugees,
we will work to bring about greater security and a
lasting peace.

- We will help states in the Middle East to fashion
regional security arrangements that bolster deter-
rence and encourage the peaceful resolution of dis-
putes.

- We will work with parties inside and outside the
region to change the destructive pattern of military
competition and proliferation. This will involve con-
fidence-building and arms control measures as well
as more global forms of control over the supply of
arms, especially weapons of mass destruction and
the means to deliver them.

- We will encourage economic reconstruction and
recovery, using the political and economic strengths
of the victorious coalition to support economic
openness and cooperation. We will also encourage
regional states to evolve toward greater political par-
ticipation and respect for human rights.

- We will continue the effort to bring about a compre-
hensive peace and true reconciliation between Israel

10

and the Arab states and between Israel and the
Palestinians.

- We will continue to demand that Iraq comply fully
and unconditionally with all relevant UN resolu-
tions, including Security Council Resolution 687 and
its stipulation that Iraqi weapons of mass destruction
and ballistic missile-related facilities be destroyed.

- We remain open to an improved relationship with
Iran. However, meaningful improvement can only
occur after Iran makes clear it is lending no support
to hostage-taking or other forms of terrorism.

- We will also continue to monitor Libyan behavior,
including terrorism, proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and attempts to destabilize neighboring
governments.

In South Asia, as elsewhere, we strongly believe that
security is best served by resolving disputes through
negotiations rather than military pressure. The dangers
of intermediate-range missile deployments and nuclear
proliferation in the sub-continent persist, however, and
this year we were unable to certify Pakistan's nuclear
program underthe Pressler Amendment. We will con-
tinue to encourage lndo-Pakistani rapprochement and
the adoption of confidence-building measures and
other concrete steps to moderate their military competi-
tion. We also remain committed to achieving a com-
prehensive political settlement in Afghanistan.

Africa

The end ofthe Cold war should benefit Africa in that it
will no longer be seen as a battleground for superpower
conflict. In a world at peace, more attention and
resources should be freed to help the world's poorest.
Nonetheless, many Africans now fear that the outside
world will lose interest in theirtroubled continent, just
at the moment when many negative trends from eco-
nomic decline to AIDS to environmental degradation
are likely to accelerate.

In a continent as diverse as Africa, democracy — as it
emerges, reemerges, or begins its development — may
take different forms, and its progress will be uneven.
But we need not be inhibited in supporting values that
have proved universal — political and human rights,
democratic limits on the powers ofgovernment, judi-
cial independence, free press and free speech. To those
who thinkthese goals are out of reach because of

Africa's poverty and disparate cultures, we say that
democracy remains the political system most open to
cultural diversity and most conducive to economic
advance. Freedom, in its universal meaning, is Africa's
birthright as much as it is anyone else's.

In the economic realm, hope lies in reducing the bur-
den of statism and encouraging indigenous enterprise
and human talent, especially in agriculture. The most
important steps are those that must be taken by
Africans themselves. Concepts of democracy and mar-
ket economics must be applied in a continent where
initially these concepts were rejected because social-
ism was fashionable. That failed experiment has now
run its course, and political elites across Africa are
rediscovering basic truths about political and econom-
ic freedom as the source of progress. We need to sup-
port this growing realism, which recognizes the failures
from the past and which has produced pragmatic new
leaders ready to move in new directions. Benign
neglect will not suffice.

Africa is not without its beacons of hope. The efforts of
white and black leaders in South Africa to move that
country into a democratic, constitutional, post-
apartheid era merit our active support and we have
provided it. We have made clear our firm and enthusi-
astic support for the brave endeavor on which they
have embarked.

Elsewhere in Africa, we can be proud of the role we
played in bringing to an end civil wars in Angola and
Ethiopia. We continue to play an active role in helping
to resolve other conflicts such as those in Liberia and
Mozambique.

Africa is now entering an age in which it can benefit
from past mistakes and build a realistic, self-sustaining
future. It is in our interest, for political as well as
humanitarian reasons, to help that process.

11

III. Relating Means to Ends: A Political
Agenda for the 1990s

ALLIANCES, COALITIONS
ANDA NEW UNITED
NATIONS

Our first priority in foreign policy remains solidarity
with our allies and friends. The stable foundation of
our security will continue to be a common effort with
peoples with whom we share fundamental moral and
political values and security interests. Those nations
with whom we are bound by alliances will continue to
be our closest partners in building a new world order.

As our response to the Gulf crisis demonstrated, our
leadership in a new era must also include a broader
concept of international community and international
diplomacy. If tensions with the Soviet Union continue
to ease, we will face more ambiguous — but still seri-
ous — challenges. It will be difficult to foresee where
future crises will arise. In many cases they will involve
states not part of one or another bloc. Increasingly we
may find ourselves in situations in which our interests
are congruent with those of nations not tied to us by
formal treaties. As in the Gulf, we may be acting in
hybrid coalitions that include not only traditional allies
but also nations with whom we do not have a mature
history of diplomatic and military cooperation or,
indeed, even a common political or moral outlook.
This will require flexibility in our diplomacy and mili-
tary policy, without losing sight of the fundamental val-
ues which that diplomacy and policy are designed to
protect and on which they are based. To this end, we
are well served to strengthen the role of international
organizations like the United Nations.

For over 40 years political differences, bloc politics
and demagogic rhetoric have kept the UN from reach-
ing the full potential envisioned by its founders. Now
we see the UN beginning to act as it was designed,
freed from the superpower antagonisms that often frus-
trated consensus, less hobbled by the ritualistic anti-
Americanism that so often weakened its credibility.

The response of the UN to Iraq's unprovoked aggres-
sion against a member state has truly vindicated and
rejuvenated the institution. But even before that, the
UN had distinguished itself in fostering democratic
change in Namibia and Nicaragua. In the near future,
we hope to see it play a constructive role in
Afghanistan, Cambodia, the Western Sahara, El
Salvador and elsewhere, assisting with elections and
the return of displaced persons, as well as with peace-
keeping.

The role ofthe UN in improving the human condition
and ameliorating human suffering — development, aid
to refugees, education, disaster relief —will continue
to attract our leadership and resources. High on our
agenda for international cooperation are the global
challenges posed by illegal drugs, terrorism and degra-
dation of the environment.

The costs of a world organization that can effectively
carry out these missions are already significant and will
increase as new tasks are undertaken. We have re—stat—
ed our intention to pay in full our annual assessments
and are now paying arrearages. We intend to complete
arrearage payments no later than 1995 and to pay our
share of any new peacekeeping requirements. In vol-
untary funding, we will pay our fair share and encour-
age others to do the same.

13
Preceding Page Blank

THE CONTEST OF IDEAS
AND THE NURTURING OF
DEMOCRA CY

Recent history has shown how much ideas count. The
Cold War was, in its decisive aspect, a war of ideas. But
ideas count only when knowledge spreads. In today's
evolving political environment, and in the face of the
global explosion of information, we must make clearto
our friends and potential adversaries what we stand for.

The need for international understanding among differ-
ent peoples, cultures, religions and forms of govern-
ment will only grow. In a world without the clear-cut
East-West divisions of the past, the flow of ideas and
information will take on larger significance as once-iso-
lated countries seek their way toward the international
mainstream. Indeed, information access has already
achieved global proportions. Atruly global community
is being formed, vindicating our democratic values.

Through broadcasts, academic and cultural exchanges,
press briefings, publications, speakers and conferences,
we engage those abroad in a dialogue about who and
what we are — to inform foreign audiences about our
policies, democratic traditions, pluralistic society and
rich academic and cultural diversity. We will increase
our efforts to clarify what America has to contribute to
the solution of global problems — and to drive home
democracy's place in this process.

ARMS CONTROL

Arms control is an important component of a balanced
strategy to ameliorate the deadly consequences of glob-
al tensions as well as to reduce their fundamental caus-
es. Our goal remains agreements that will enhance the
security of the United States and its allies while
strengthening international stability by:

- reducing military capabilities that could provide
incentives to initiate attack;

- enhancing predictability in the size and structure of
forces in order to reduce the fear of aggressive intent;

- ensurin con i ence in com iance, rou e ec-
f d 1 th h ff
tive verification.

14

Our pursuit of these goals has profited from the recent,
positive changes in East-West relations. With renewed
commitment to conscientious implementation and the
resolution of remaining issues, we are within reach of

completing an arms control agenda that few imagined

possible.

Much has already been accomplished. V\ﬁthin the past
year we and the Soviets have agreed to cease produc-
tion of chemical weapons and to destroy, using safe
and environmentally-sound procedures, the vast major-
ity of our chemical weapons stocks. We have agreed to
new protocols to treaties on limiting underground
nuclear weapons tests and nuclear explosions for
peaceful purposes, incorporating unprecedented on-site
verification of compliance with the limits set by the
treaties. At the Paris Summit last November, the United
States, the Soviet Union and the other nations of the
Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe
(CSCE) endorsed new measures to promote transparen-
cy in military dispositions and practices.

Also in Paris, the United States, our North Atlantic
allies, the states of Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union
signed the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in
Europe (CFE), a historic agreement that will establish
numerical parity in major conventional armaments
between East and West from the Atlantic to the Urals.
The treaty will require thousands of weapons to be
destroyed and includes unprecedented monitoring pro-
visions. Submitting the treaty to the Senate for its advice
and consent to ratification was delayed by Soviet
claims — made after the treaty was signed — that some
of its ground force equipment held by units like naval
infantry and coastal defense was not covered by the
agreement. The satisfactory resolution of this question
has opened the way for us to move forward.

Soviet behavior on CFE complicated the completion of
a Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty. However, during the
London Economic Summit, Presidents Bush and
Gorbachev were able to overcome the last few obsta-
cles on START, ending nine long years of difficult, tech-
nical negotiations. Signed in Moscow, this agreement
will mark a fundamental milestone in reducing the risk
of nuclear war — stabilizing the balance of strategic
forces at lower levels, providing for significant reduc-
tions in the most threatening weapons and encouraging
a shift toward strategic systems better suited for retalia-
tion than for a first strike.

Our efforts to improve strategic stability will not stop
here. We and the Soviets have pledged further efforts to
enhance strategic stability and reduce the risk of nucle-
ar war. We will seek agreements that improve surviv-
ability, remove incentives for a nuclear first strike and
implement an appropriate relationship between strate-
gic offenses and defenses. In particular, we will pursue
Soviet agreement to permit the deployment of defenses
designed to address the threat of limited ballistic missile
strikes, a growing mutual concern. We are also consult-
ing with our NATO allies on the framework that will
guide the United States in future discussions with the
Soviet Union on the reduction ofshort-range nuclear
forces in Europe.

The United States has long supported international
agreements designed to promote openness and freedom
of navigation on the high seas. Over the past year, how-
ever, the Soviet Union has intensified efforts to restrict
naval forces in ways contrary to internationally recog-
nized rights of access. We will continue to reject such
proposals. As a maritime nation, with our dependence
on the sea to preserve legitimate security and commer-
cial ties, freedom of the seas is and will remain a vital
interest. We will not agree to measures that would limit
the ability of our Navy to protect that interest, nor will
we permit a false equation to be drawn between our
Navy and regional ground-force imbalances that are
inherently destabilizing. Recent events in the Gulf,
Liberia, Somalia and elsewhere show that American
seapower, without arbitrary limits on its force structure
or operations, makes a strong contribution to global sta-
bility and mutual security.

S TE MM/N G PROLIFERA TI ON

As we put the main elements of European and East-
West arms control into place, attention will increasingly
turn to other regional and global arms control objec-
tives. None is more urgent than stopping the global
proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons, as well as the missiles to deliver them.

The Gulf crisis drove home several lessons about this
challenge:

- International agreements, while essential, cannot
cope with the problem alone. Iraq is a party to both
the 1925 Geneva Protocol and the 1968 Nuclear

Non—Proliferation Treaty (NPT). Notwithstanding its
treaty obligations, Iraq has used chemical weapons
and pursued nuclear ambitions.

- Export controls must be strengthened. Chemical
weapons facilities in Libya and Iraq received tech-
nology and equipment from Western companies.
Iraq used the deadly product of its facilities against
its own people. Iraqi and several other nations‘
nuclear efforts and missile programs have also bene-
fited from outside assistance.

- A successful non—proliferation strategy must address
the underlyling security concerns that drive the quest
to obtain advanced weapons and must encompass
contingency planning to deal with these weapons
should prevention fail.

We are pursuing a three-tiered non—proliferation strate-
gy: to strengthen existing arrangements; to expand the
membership of multilateral regimes directed against
proliferation; and to pursue new initiatives — such as
the Chemical Weapons Convention and the initiative
the President launched in May forthe Middle East.

This latter effort reflects all the elements of our non—pro-
liferation strategy. It includes promising new approach-
es, such as a proposed set of guidelines for responsible
conventional weapons transfers to the region and a pro-
posal to freeze acquisition, production and testing of
surface-to-surface missiles. It also seeks to expand the
membership of the Non—Proliferation Treaty and the
Biological Weapons Convention, and to strengthen the
application of these and other agreements where they
are already in force.

In other areas, we have already tightened export con-
trols, streamlining export-licensing procedures while
taking full account of security needs. New standards
will ensure that the export of supercomputers will be
subject to stringent safeguards against misuse. Criminal
penalties and other sanctions against those who con-
tribute to proliferation will be expanded.

To thwart the export of chemical and biological
weapon-related materials and technology, we have
expanded our own controls over precursor chemicals
and proposed stringent international controls, recogniz-
ing that only multilateral measures will be truly effec-
tive in a competitive global marketplace. This multilat-
eral approach bore fruit in the twenty-nation Australia

15

Group of major chemical suppliers, which agreed in
May to control common lists of chemical weapon pre-
cursors and equipment usable in chemical weapons
manufacture. The best non—proliferation measure, of
course, would be a completed Chemical Weapons
Convention.

Our efforts to stem the proliferation of threatening mis-
siles center on the multinational Missile Technology
Control Regime (MTCR), strengthened last year by the
inclusion of several new members. Since missile prolif-
eration efforts will surely persist, we and our MTCR
partners must improve controls, broaden membership
further and reinforce the emerging international con-
sensus against the spread of missile technology.

In the nuclear sphere, last year's review conference of
the Nuclear Non—Proliferation Treaty produced a large
measure of consensus that the NPT remains essential to
global stability, although intransigence by a few delega-
tions blocked unanimous agreement to a final confer-
ence declaration. The United States remains steadfast in
support of the NPT and the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA), which provides technical assistance for
civilian uses of nuclear energy while safeguarding
materials essential for the development of nuclear
weapons. Although trouble spots remain, progress has
been made. Iraqi nuclear efforts have been set back
substantially, while the UN Special Commission imple-
menting Security Council Resolution 687 seeks disman-
tlement of all nuclear weapon-related activities in Iraq.
Argentina and Brazil have agreed to accept IAEA safe-
guards on all their nuclear facilities and to take steps
toward bringing into force the Treaty of Tlatelolco,
which creates a Latin American nuclear-weapons-free
zone. Agreement by India and Pakistan to ban attacks
on each other's nuclear facilities also helped ease the
tense nuclear rivalry in that part of the world.

The proliferation of advanced weapons poses an omi-
nous challenge to global peace and stability. To meet it,
we will work with our allies to address the causes of
strife while curbing exports to builders of weapons of
mass destruction.

INTELLIGENCE PROGRAMS

The unprecedented scope and pace of change in
today's world — and the increasing number of actors
now able to threaten global peace — highlight the need
for reliable information and a sophisticated understand-

16

mg of events and trends. The global reach of American
intelligence capabilities is a unique national asset, cru-
cial not only to our own security, but also to our leader-
ship role in responding to international challenges.

The Soviet Union necessarily remains a major concern
of U.S. policy. While changes in the Soviet Union
promise hope, the turbulence of change itself demands
that we monitor events and assess prospects for the
future. Our monitoring of Soviet military capabilities
and the effective verification of arms control treaties
will remain the bedrock of any effort to build confi-
dence and a safer world.

In a new era there are also new tasks and new priori-
ties. Regional turmoil will place growing burdens on
intelligence collection, processing and analysis. At the
same time, we must track the threats posed by narcotics
trafficking, terrorism and the proliferation of advanced
weapons. We must also be more fully aware of interna-
tional financial, trade and technology trends that could
affect the security of the United States, including its
economic well-being.

Sweeping political and economic changes also make
for a more challenging counterintelligence environ-
ment. Warmer relations between the United States and
former adversaries will open new opportunities for the
intelligence services of those countries. Growing inter-
national economic competition and potential regional
instabilities vastly broaden the scope of the potential
intelligence threat. Our traditional openness, combined
with recent changes in immigration laws and the sheer
volume of information flow in the United States, affords
great access to sensitive information and facilities as
well as to individuals who may be targets for intelli-
gence collection.

ECONOMIC AND SECURITY
ASSISTANCE

Foreign assistance is a vital instrument of American for-
eign policy. Now — as we look forward to expanded
cooperation with our prosperous fellow democracies,
with a growing number of regional organizations and
with a revitalized United Nations — we are revisiting
the direction and priorities of ourforeign assistance
program. We will focus our efforts and resources on
five major challenges:

- Promoting and consolidating democratic values: Our
programs will be an increasingly valuable instrument
forfostering political choice, human rights and self-
determination. From Central America to South Africa
to Eastern Europe, we have used our influence to
advance these universal goals.

- Promoting market principles: U.S. assistance must
encourage economic reform and sustainable devel-
opment. Multilaterally — through institutions like
the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank,
and the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade —
we foster policies that break down statist barriers to
enterprise and unleash the productive forces within
every society.

- Promoting peace: The bonds of collective defense
can be strengthened through economic and security
assistance. Such programs allow friendly states to
achieve the security and stability essential for politi-
cal freedom and economic growth. They are also an
indispensable tool in cementing our alliance rela-
tionships — enhancing interoperability, promoting
needed access and reaping goodwill.

- Protecting against transnational threats: International
terrorism, narcotics, AIDS and environmental degra-
dation threaten all peaceful nations. Our aid helps
combat these dangers.

- Meeting urgent human needs. We will respond
quickly and substantially to the suffering caused by
natural or man-made disasters.

Managed wisely, our aid programs can play a key role
in fostering a world order that comports with our funda-
mental values. But we must ensure that our resources
are adequate, that our programs pursue well-defined
goals, and that we retain the flexibility to respond to
change and unforeseen requirements and opportunities.
The changes we have recently proposed to the Foreign
Assistance Act will eliminate obsolete and inconsistent
provisions and set a solid foundation for cooperation
with the Congress on a program that can respond to
fast-moving events in the world as quickly as they
occur. Such reform is urgently needed if our aid pro-
gram is to be relevant to today's necessities.

ILLICIT DRUGS

The international trade in drugs is a major threat to our
national security. No threat does more damage to our
national values and institutions, and the domestic vio-
lence generated by the trade in drugs is all too familiar.
Trafficking organizations undermine the sovereign gov-
ernments of our friends and weaken and distort nation-
al economies with a vast, debilitating black market and
large funding requirements for enforcement, criminal
justice, prevention and treatment systems. Demand
reduction at home and an aggressive attack on the
international drug trade are the main elements in our
strategy. They must be pursued together.

During the 1990s, cocaine traffickers will likely try to
develop new markets in Europe — particularly in light
of the impending relaxation of border controls between
EC countries — and in those nations of East Asia expe-
riencing rapid economic growth. We can also expect
increasingly energetic efforts to import cocaine and
heroin into the United States, including the use of
longer-range aircraft entering U.S. airspace via Canada
and of drug-laden cargo containers transhipped to the
United States via Europe and the Pacific. Renewed
assaults on the U.S. market by increasingly sophisticat-
ed traffickers remind us of the need to also attack the
drug trade at the source — its home country base of
operations.

Such an effort begins with bolstering the political com-
mitment of drug producer and transit countries to
strengthen their laws, legal institutions and programs to
prosecute, punish, and — where appropriate — extra-
dite drug traffickers and money launderers. In the
Andean region, where most of the world's cocaine is
cultivated and refined, we seek to enhance the effec-
tiveness of host-nation law enforcement and military
activities against powerful and well entrenched traffick-
ing organizations, and to increase public and leader-
ship awareness of the drug threat. Our trade, aid and
investment programs aim to strengthen and diversify
the legitimate economies of the drug- producing
Andean nations to enable them to overcome the desta-
bilizing effects of eliminating coca and its derivatives,
major sources of income. Our heroin strategy will foster
cooperation with other countries, to engage their
resources to dismantle their own cultivation and refin-
ing industries, and reduce demand for drugs. We will
solicit the assistance of others in influencing producers
to whom we have limited access.

17

IMMIGRANTS AND
REFUGEES

As a nation founded by immigrants and refugees, the
United States has a strong tradition of taking in those
who flee persecution and seek a better life. We open
our doors annually to tens of thousands of refugees and
hundreds of thousands of immigrants, welcoming both
for the diversity and strength they bring the Nation. We
also have a commitment to help the uprooted who are
in danger or in need, a commitment demonstrated in
the past several months by our role in the international
effort to assist Iraqi refugees and our reaching out to
Africans and others.

In 1990 the United States welcomed refugees from all
regions of the world. As in the past several years, the
majority came from the Soviet Union and Asia. In
Vietnam, we are dismayed by continued human rights
abuses. Hanoi is, however, allowing former political
prisoners to emigrate. The United States resettled
14,000 former political prisoners and their family mem-
bers from Vietnam in 1990 and the number will
increase this year. But we cannot take in everyone. We
must look to other countries to be more receptive to
those in need. Nor can the United States Government

18

fund and provide for every refugee in this country. As in
the past, our private sector has an important role to

play.

As noted earlier, economic hardship, political uncer-
tainty and ethnic strife may generate large numbers of
refugees in Europe. Some will be true refugees and oth-
ers will be economic migrants, those who move to
escape economic misery. Though international respons-
es must differ between these two categories — to be
able to protect those who flee persecution and may be
in physical danger—the world's nations must be ready
to respond quickly and humanely to both.

For 16 million refugees worldwide, the United States
offers assistance through international programs and
recognizes the critical role of nongovernmental organi-
zations in providing care. Our budgeted refugee assis-
tance levels have increased, and we will do our fair
share. We will also meet our responsibility to search for
diplomatic solutions to the problems that spawn
refugee flows.

A period of turmoil and transition is often a period of
dislocation. If our diplomatic efforts and our aid pro-
grams prove inadequate, the volume of refugees and
migrants will be an index of our failure. The world
community will need to be prepared.

IV. Relating Means to Ends: An
Economic Agenda for the 1990s

Events of the past year have reaffirmed the critical link
between the strength and flexibility of the U.S. econo-
my and our ability to achieve national objectives.
Indeed, strong macroeconomic performance on the
part of the United States is not only an economic objec-
tive but a prerequisite for maintaining a position of
global political leadership.

ECONOMIC CHALLENGES

Even as we now see a transformation of the global
economy along lines consistent with policies we have
pursued for many years, new challenges — the crisis in
the Gulf and its aftermath, the political and economic
transformation in Eastern Europe and potentially in the
Soviet Union, the resurgence of democracy and market
economies in Central and South America — have
placed new demands on our management of economic
policy. We must ensure that our domestic economy and
our economic involvement abroad are responsive to a
changing economic landscape.

Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, and actions taken by the
international coalition to resist Iraqi aggression, espe-
cially tested our economic strength and our ability to
help manage international economic forces. Economies
around the world were affected by the volatility of oil
prices and the disruption of economic ties to countries
in the Gulf. Egypt, Turkey and Jordan were particularly
hurt. We must continue to work to ensure the econom-
ic health of these countries as well as others that have
suffered markedly from this crisis. The United States
will provide leadership, but in close collaboration with
major donors and creditors and with international
financial institutions, particularly the International
Monetary Fund and the World Bank.

As always, a dynamic domestic economy plays a criti-
cal role in helping us achieve national objectives in all
spheres. Policies to control inflation, reduce the Federal
deficit, promote savings, improve the labor force and
encourage competitiveness and entrepreneurial initia-
tive remain critical to our overall well-being and securi-
ty. As economies expand worldwide, the economic
strength of others will, of course, grow in relative terms.
This is not a threat to us, but rather a success of
Western policies. That said, Americans must realize
that the economic strength vital to our national interests
comes from investing for the future, thus putting a pre-
mium on domestic saving. Today's labor force and
management, and those of tomorrow, must also be
committed to quality and innovation. These are the
fruits of hard work — and a prerequisite for continued
global leadership.

We continue to pursue a strategy that expands and
strengthens market economies around the world. This
will require international efforts to open markets and
expand trade; to strengthen cooperation among major
industrial countries and with international financial
institutions; and to apply imaginative solutions to the
problems of developing countries.

MAINTAINING ECONOMIC
GROWTH

Clear signs are emerging that the U.S.economy is
pulling out of its brief recession but uncertainty remains
over economic performance in much of the rest of the
world. Therefore, macroeconomic policies in all the
major countries must be designed to sustain global eco-
nomic recovery with price stability. Global growth is
needed in order to create a favorable economic and
trade environment for reform and reconstruction in

19

Eastern Europe and the USSR, and ensure as well the
success of the democratic, market-oriented measures
that have been adopted worldwide. The major coun-
tries must continue to strengthen global coordination of
economic policies to achieve these aims.

GLOBAL IMBALANCES

While the U.S. trade deficit has continued to decline,
trade imbalances with Japan and many other countries
remain substantial. Reducing these imbalances remains
a priority. For the United States this requires a sustained
effort to reduce and ultimately eliminate budget deficits
while also encouraging private savings and investment
in order to preserve U.S. competitiveness. Countries
with large trade surpluses bear a special responsibility
for maintaining adequate growth in domestic demand
and opening their markets further to imports.

DEBT

The aggregate debt of developing countries was pro-
jected to reach $1.3 trillion in 1990, according to the
World Bank. Inappropriate domestic policies in debtor
countries — overvalued exchange rates, large budget
deficits, investment in inefficient public enterprises and
restrictions on trade and investment — were major
causes of this debt accumulation and contributed to
capital flight. External shocks, high international inter-
est rates and recession in the 1980s also hurt. Recently
this burden has been exacerbated by the economic dis-
locations and fluctuations in energy prices resulting
from the Gulf crisis.

In March 1989, the United States proposed a new inter-
national debt strategy that advanced voluntary reduc-
tion of commercial bank debt and debt service to help
restore debtor financial health and pave the way for
new commercial bank lending. Implementation of a
strong economic reform program supported by the IMF
and World Bank is a prerequisite. So far, Mexico, Costa
Rica, Nigeria, the Philippines, Venezuela, Morocco,
Uruguay and Chile have negotiated agreements under
these proposals. Others are undertaking reforms to
obtain such support.

Creditor governments have also made substantial con-
tributions to relief through rescheduling of official bilat-
eral debt and have recently offered new treatment for
the official debt of lower middle income countries, as

20

mandated by last year's Houston Economic Summit,
and for Poland and Egypt. The Enterprise for the
Americas Initiative also promotes growth in Latin
America by emphasizing official debt reduction and
investment reform.

TRADE

Countries accept as natural that trade and investment
should flow freely within national boundaries or within
special regional groupings in orderto improve econom-
ic and social welfare. Internationally, this concept has
met varying degrees of acceptance. Countries have pro-
tected certain sectors for national security, economic,
industrial or social reasons.

For the last 50 years, significant efforts have been
undertaken, primarily through the General Agreement
on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), to expand trade among all
nations by opening markets and resolving trade dis-
putes. The latest and most ambitious effort has been the
Uruguay Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations,
begun in 1986. The Uruguay Round is distinguished
from previous efforts by the intention of GATT members
to extend GATT rules to areas such as agriculture, ser-
vices, investment, the protection of intellectual property
and textiles. At the Houston Economic Summit in 1990,
the United States, Canada, Japan, France, Germany,
Italy, the United Kingdom, and the European
Community committed to removing trade barriers in
these politically difficult areas. The wise action of
Congress in extending "fast track" procedures for trade
agreements is evidence of America's commitment to
responsible leadership.

The promise of the Uruguay Round has yet to be ful-
filled, however, primarily because of strong differences
over the scope and pace of efforts to dismantle the
enormous barriers to trade in agricultural goods. Given
the interdependence of modern economies, and the
need to expand trading opportunities for emerging
democracies and other developing countries, it is
important that the Round be brought to a successful
conclusion. This is a test of the ability and willingness
of all countries to rise to the challenges of a new world
order and will require compromise on all sides. The
United States will do its part. A successful Round will
not end bilateral trade disputes but it will enable coun-
tries to resolve them in a multilateral context and on
the basis of internationally agreed rules.

The United States will continue its efforts to expand
trade further. We are working with Japan under the
Structural impediments Initiative to lower trade barriers.
As noted earlier, we are building on the successful
U.S.-Canada Free Trade Agreement by undertaking dis-
cussions with Mexico and Canada which we expect
will lead to a trilateral free trade agreement linking all
three economies. The Enterprise forthe Americas
Initiative and preferential trade programs for the
Caribbean basin and the Andean region will also foster
trade liberalization.

TECHNOLOGY

The interrelationship of economic and military strength
has never been stronger. Both are affected by the way
technology transfer is handled, particularly with respect
to export controls. Balances must be struck. Loss of
technological leadership can undermine military readi-
ness and strength. Not participating freely in worldwide
markets constrains economic growth. Recent changes
to our strategic trade policies reflect a new balance
between these competing factors.

In cooperation with our Western partners in the
Coordinating Committee for Multilateral Export
Controls (COCOM), we have completely overhauled
export controls, reducing them to a core list of only the
most strategically significant goods and technologies.
This action reflects the emergence of democratic gov-
ernments in Eastern Europe as well as a reduced mili-
tary threat to the United States and our allies from a dis-
solved Warsaw Pact and a Soviet army that is with-
drawing. The result has been a two-thirds reduction in
the licenses that industry is required to obtain prior to
exporting.

Treating the new democracies of Central and Eastern
Europe differently from the Soviet Union, we and our
COCOM partners have adopted a wide-ranging special
procedure for Poland, Hungary and Czechoslovakia
that ensures that controlled technology imports are
used for purely civilian applications. We look forward
to the day when we can remove these countries com-
pletely from the list of proscribed destinations. We have
a strong interest in promoting the growth of free mar-
kets in democratic societies. At the same time we must
be sure that the easing of COCOM controls does not
result in the proliferation of dangerous technologies to
other areas like the Middle East. For that reason, we

have — in close cooperation with other supplier
nations — significantly improved controls on technolo-
gies useful in developing nuclear, chemical and biolog-
ical weapons and the missiles to deliver them.

ENERGY

Secure, ample, diversified and clean supplies of energy
are essential to our national economic prosperity and
security. Forthe foreseeable future, oil will remain a
vital element in our energy mix. For geological and
economic reasons, U.S. oil imports are likely to
increase in coming years. The rate of increase, howev-
er, could be reduced by improving the efficiency with
which oil is used in the economy and by substituting
alternative fuels.

Security of oil supplies is enhanced by a supportive for-
eign policy and appropriate military capabilities. We
will work to improve understanding among key partici-
pants in the oil industry of the basic fundamentals of
the oil market. We will also maintain our capability to
respond to requests to protect vital oil facilities, on land
or at sea, while working to resolve the underlying polit-
ical, social and economic tensions that could threaten
the free flow of oil.

The stability of the Gulf region, which contains two-
thirds of the world's known oil reserves, is of funda-
mental concern to us. Political and military turbulence
in the region has a direct impact on our economy,
largely through higher oil prices and potential supply
disruptions. Diversification of both productive and
spare capacity is important to providing a cushion to
the oil market. Increased production, in an environ-
mentally sound manner, from other areas would also
contribute to the security of oil supplies.

Because energy markets — particularly the oil market
— are global, our energy security requires close coop-
eration among energy consumers. The aftermath of
Iraq's invasion of Kuwait demonstrates the need to
improve strategic stock levels within oil-consuming
countries and the value of international cooperation to
help mitigate damage brought about by sudden, serious
disruptions of supply. The United States should develop
creative mechanisms to fill its Strategic Petroleum
Reserve to the statutorily required one billion barrels,
consistent with sound budgetary practices and avoiding
an unnecessary burden on the oil market.

21

Our use of oil is the key source of our vulnerability to
world oil supply disruption. To reduce this vulnerabili-
ty, we must work to both reduce oil consumption and
to use oil more efficiently. The efficient use of energy in
all sectors of our economy is of particular importance.
We must intensify the development of alternative
sources of energy (nuclear, natural gas, coal and renew-
ables) and support aggressive research and develop-
ment of advanced energy technologies to provide the
clean, affordable, reliable energy supplies we will need
in the mid-21st century.

To meet pressing environmental concerns, we must
Ii mit the harmful effects of energy production, trans-
portation and use. The increased, safe use of nuclear
power, for example, can significantly reduce green-

house gas emissions.

THE ENVIRONMENT

We must manage the Earth's natural resources in ways
that protect the potential for growth and opportunity for
present and future generations. The experience of the
past half-century has taught that democratic political
institutions and free market economies enhance human
well-being. But even as we experience political and
economic success, we cannot ignore the costs that
growth, unguided by wisdom, can impose on our natu-
ral environment. A healthy economy and a healthy
environment go hand-in-hand. Solutions must be found
that protect our environment while allowing for the
economic development needed to improve the living
standards of a growing world population.

Global environmental concerns include such diverse
but interrelated issues as stratospheric ozone depletion,
climate change, food security, water supply, deforesta-
tion, biodiversity and treatment of wastes. A common
ingredient in each is that they respect no international
boundaries. The stress from these environmental chal-
lenges is already contributing to political conflict.
Recognizing a shared responsibility for global steward-
ship is a necessaw step for global progress. Our part-
ners will find the United States a ready and active par-
ticipant in this effort.

SPA CE

The time has come to look beyond brief space
encounters and to commit to a future in which
Americans and citizens of all nations live and work in

22

space. We have developed a plan to make this vision a
reality and the National Space Council, under Vice
President Quayle, is charged with bringing coherence,
continuity and commitment to our efforts. We have
made solid progress in the five key elements of our
space strategy:

- Developing our space launch capability as a nation-
al resource: This infrastructure will be to the 21st
century what the great highway and dam projects
were to the 20th. Reliable space launchers will pro-
vide the "highway" to space and the solar system in

the next century.

- Expanding human presence and activity beyond
earth orbit and into the Solar System: We are well
underway with unmanned exploration of the Solar
System. Magellan, Viking and Voyager have been
spectacular successes, Galileo is on its way to
Jupiter, Ulysses has launched on its wide-ranging
orbit of the sun and soon we will begin missions to
Saturn and the Asteroid Belt. The Space Exploration
Initiative will build on the successes and expertise
developed in the Apollo, Skylab, Space Shuttle and
eventually the Space Station Freedom programs, ulti-
mately establishing permanent human settlements
on the Moon and putting humans on Mars.

- Obtaining scientific, technological and economic
benefits and improving the quality of life on earth:
Communications satellites already link people
around the globe; their contribution to the free flow
of information and ideas played a part in the
Revolution of '89. We also use space systems to veri-
fy arms control treaties. But the potential of space to
improve life on earth has barely been tapped. Avery
promising application is in the area of the environ-
ment— monitoring and helping to understand the
process of ecological change, and holding signifi-
cant promise for new sources of energy, material and
products.

- Capitalizing on the unique environment of space to
foster economic well-being: Private investment in
space will create jobs, boost the economy and
strengthen our scientific, engineering and industrial
base. New commercial markets will be created, and
existing industries will become stronger and more
competitive in the world marketplace. The recently
approved commercial launch policy is a first step in
this process.

- Ensuring the freedom of space for exploration and
development: There are now some ten significant
spacefaring nations, with others on the way. Space
will become in the future what oceans have always
been — highways to discovery and commerce. But
as with sea lanes, space lanes can be closed and can
even be used as springboards for attack. We must
ensure the freedom to use space for exploration and
development, for ourselves and all nations.

Assured access to space requires a healthy military
space program. We must be able to monitor events in
space, warn of threats and intervene to protect impor-
tant space assets. This protection may take the form of
passive measures to enhance the survivability of critical
systems. We must also have the option of active
defense systems, including an anti-satellite system, to
stop an aggressor before he can use a space system to
threaten objects or people in or from space.

23

V. Relating Means to Ends: A Defense
Agenda for the 1990s

As the war to liberate Kuwait clearly showed, the
essential demands on our military forces — to deter
conflict whenever possible but to prevail in those that
do arise — are certain to endure. Nonetheless, the spe-
cific challenges facing our military in the 1990s and
beyond will be different from those that have dominat-
ed our thinking for the past 40 years.

In a world less driven by an immediate, massive threat
to Europe or the danger of global war, the need to sup-
port a smaller but still crucial forward presence and to
deal with regional contingencies — including possibly
a limited, conventional threat to Europe — will shape
how we organize, equip, train, deploy and employ our
active and reserve forces. We must also have the ability
to reconstitute forces, if necessary, to counter any resur-
gent global threat.

As the war in the Gulf made clear, the easing of the
Soviet threat does not mean an end to all hazards. As
we seekto build a new world order in the aftermath of
the Cold War, we will likely discoverthat the enemy
we face is less an expansionist communism than it is
instability itself. And, in the face of multiple and varied
threats to stability, we will increasingly find our military
strength a source of reassurance and a foundation for
security, regionally and globally.

In the face of competing fiscal demands and a changing
but still dangerous world, we have developed a new
defense strategy that provides the conceptual frame-
work for our future forces. This new strategy will guide
our deliberate reductions to no more than the forces we
need to defend our interests and meet our global
responsibilities. It will also guide our restructuring so
that our remaining forces are appropriate to the chal-
lenges of a new era. The four fundamental demands of
a new era are already clear: to ensure strategic deter-

rence, to exercise forward presence in key areas, to
respond effectively to crises and to retain the national
capacity to reconstitute forces should this ever be need-
ed

NUCLEAR DETERRENCE

Deterrence will indeed be enhanced as a result of the
START Treaty and U.S. force modernization efforts can
go forward with greater knowledge and predictability
about future Soviet forces. Nevertheless, even with the
Treaty, Soviet nuclear capabilities will remain substan-
tialf. Despite economic and political difficulties, the
Soviet Union continues its modernization of strategic
forces. Even in a new era, deterring nuclear attack
remains the number one defense priority of the United
States.

Strategic Nuclear Forces

The modernization of our Triad of land-based missiles,
strategic bombers and submarine-launched missiles
will be vital to the effectiveness of our deterrent in the
next century. We need to complete the Trident subma-
rine program with the eighteen boats and modern
missiles necessaw to ensure a survivable force. The B-2
strategic bomber must be deployed so that the flexibili-
ty traditionally provided by the bomber force will be
available in the future. The B-2 will also firmly plant
our aerospace industry in a new era of low-observable
technology and the bomber itself will have unique
value across the spectrum of conflict. Finally, we must
continue the development of land-based, mobile
lCBMs in order to keep our deployment options open.

Our command, control and communications capabili-
ties are critical to nuclear deterrence and to ensuring
the survivability ofour constitutional government under

25

all circumstances of attack. Our civil defense program
is still needed to deal with the consequences of an
attack, while also providing important capabilities to
respond to natural and man-made catastrophes.

The safety, security, control and effectiveness of United
States nuclear weapon systems are also of paramount
importance. We are incorporating the most modern
safety and control features into our deterrent stockpile
as rapidly as practicable and developing new safety
technologies for future weapons. Older weapons that
lack the most modern safety features are being replaced
or retired.

Testing of nuclear weapons plays a key part in assuring
the safety and effectiveness of our deterrent forces.
While we test only as much as is required for national
security purposes, testing is essential to ensure the relia-
bility and effectiveness of our weapons, to identify any
safety issues and to prove any corrective measures. A
halt to nuclear testing would not eliminate weapons or
increase security, but it would erode confidence in our
deterrent and severely restrict our ability to make
improvements, especially in nuclear safety.

Just as our weapons must be safe, the facilities that pro-
duce them must be safe, efficient, economical, and
environmentally sound. Our current facilities are being
renovated and brought up to modern standards. At the
same time we are moving forward to consolidate and
reconfigure the current large and older complex, look-
ing toward one that will be smaller, more flexible and
more efficient. Our production complex must be able
to respond to potential needs ranging from accelerated
production to accelerated retirement of weapons,
depending on the security environment in the years
ahead.

We must also recognize that the deterrence issues of a
new era are now at hand. Despite the threat still posed
by the existence of Soviet nuclear weapons, the likeli-
hood of their deliberate use by the Soviet state is
declining and the scenario which we frequently pro-
jected as the precursor of their use — massive war in
Europe — is less likely than at any other time since
World War II. These developments affect questions of
nuclear targeting, the alert status and operational pro-
cedures of our forces and ultimately the type and num-
ber of weapons sufficient to ensure our safety and that
of our allies. We have already begun to make adjust-
ments to our nuclear forces and to the policies that

26

guide them in recognition of the disintegration of the
Warsaw Pact and changes in the Soviet Union itself.
Beyond this, while we have traditionally focused on
deterring a unitary, rational actor applying a relatively
knowable calculus of potential costs and gains, our
thinking must now encompass potential instabilities
within states as well as the potential threat from states
or leaders who might perceive they have little to lose in
employing weapons of mass destruction.

N0n—Strategic Nuclear Forces

Below the level of strategic forces, we have traditional-
ly maintained other nuclear forces for a variety of pur-
poses. They have highlighted our resolve and have
helped to link conventional defense to the broader
strategic nuclear guarantee of the United States. This
has helped remove incentives that otherwise might
have accelerated nuclear proliferation. These systems
have also served to deter an enemy's use of such
weapons and they have contributed to the deterrence
of conventional attack. These needs persist.

In Europe, we and our allies have always sought the
lowest number and most stable types of weapons need-
ed to prevent war. Indeed, NATO has unilaterally
reduced thousands of nuclear weapons over the past
decade, in addition to the elimination of an entire class
of U.S. and Soviet weapons as called for in the Treaty
on Intermediate Range Nuclear Forces. Changes in
Europe have now allowed us to forgo plans to modern-
ize our LANCE missiles and nuclear artillery shells and
we will work to implement the commitments of the
London Declaration with respect to short-range nuclear
weapons currently deployed in Europe.

Even with the dramatic changes we see in Europe,
however, non-strategic nuclear weapons remain inte-
gral to our strategy of deterrence. They make NATO's
resolve unmistakably clear and help prevent war by
ensuring that there are no circumstances in which a
nuclear response to military action might be discount-
ed. In practical terms, this means greater reliance on
aircraft armed with modern weapons. As the principal
means by which Alliance members share nuclear risks
and burdens, these aircraft and their weapons must be
based in Europe. Such a posture is not designed to
threaten any European state but to provide a secure
deterrent in the face of unforeseen circumstances.

Missile Defenses

Flexible response and deterrence through the threat of
retaliation have preserved the security of the United
States and its allies for decades. In the early 1980s, we
began the Strategic Defense Initiative in the face of an
unconstrained Soviet ballistic-missile program and a
significant Soviet commitment to strategic defenses. SDI
was intended to shift deterrence to a safer, more stable
basis as effective strategic defenses would diminish the
confidence of an adversary in his ability to execute a
successful attack.

Notwithstanding the continued modernization of Soviet
offensive forces and the pursuit of more effective strate-
gic defenses, the positive changes in our relationship
with the Soviet Union and the fundamental changes in
Eastern Europe have markedly reduced the danger of a
war in Europe that could escalate to the strategic nucle-
ar level. At the same time, the threat posed by global
ballistic-missile proliferation and by an accidental or
unauthorized launch resulting from political turmoil
has grown considerably. Thus, the United States, our
forces, and our allies and friends face a continued and
even growing threat from ballistic missiles.

In response to these trends, we have redirected SDI to
pursue a system providing Global Protection Against
Limited Strikes (GPALS). V\ﬁth adequate funding, it will
be possible to begin to deploy systems that will better
protect ourtroops in the field from ballistic-missile
attack by the mid-1990s and that will protect the
United States itself from such attacks by the turn of the
century. GPALS is designed to provide protection
against a ballistic missile launched from anywhere
against a target anywhere in the world. The system will
be based on technologies which SDI has pioneered, but
would be both smaller and less expensive than the ini-
tial deployment originally projected for SDI.

GPALS offers many potential advantages: the United
States would be protected against limited strikes by bal-
listic missiles; our forward-deployed forces would be
better defended against missile attacks; and our allies,
many of whom lie on the edge of troubled areas, could
also be better protected. The record of the PATRIOT
against Iraqi SCUDs highlights the great potential for
defenses against ballistic missiles, the critical role of
missile defenses and the need to improve such defenses
further.

GPALS could also provide incentives against further
proliferation of ballistic missiles. If these missiles did
not hold the potential to cause certain and immediate
damage, nations might be less likely to go to such great
lengths to acquire them. Access to U.S. assistance in
defenses may also provide an incentive for countries
not to seek ballistic missiles or weapons of mass
destruction.

FORWARD PRESENCE

Maintaining a positive influence in distant regions
requires that we demonstrate our engagement. The for-
ward presence of our military forces often provides the
essential glue in important alliance relationships and
signals that our commitments are backed by tangible
actions. Our presence can deter aggression, preserve
regional balances, deflect arms races and prevent the
power vacuums that invite conflict. While our forward
deployments will be reduced in the future, the prudent
forward basing of forces and the prepositioning of
equipment reduce the burden of projecting powerfrom
the continental United States. Indeed, certain regions
— like Europe and East Asia — represent such com-
pelling interests to the United States that they will
demand the permanent deployment of some U.S. forces
for as long as they are needed and welcomed by our
allies as part of a common effort. But even in these
regions, the size of our forward deployments can be
smaller as the threat diminishes and the defense capa-
bilities of our allies improve. In other regions our pres-
ence, while important, can take less permanent forms.

Across the Atlantic: Europe
and the Middle East

In Europe, Soviet reductions and the dissolution of the
Warsaw Pact allow us to scale back our presence to a
smaller, but still significant, contribution to NATO's
overall force levels. This presence will include the
equivalent of a robust army corps, with a corps head-
quarters, associated corps units, and two ground force
divisions supplemented by several air wings, appropri-
ate naval forces, and sufficient infrastructure to support
a return of additional forces. Such a force will preserve
the operational, notjust symbolic, significance of our
presence.

As called for in July at the London NATO Summit, we
will work with our allies to make our forces in Europe

27

more flexible and mobile and more fully integrated into
multinational formations. NATO will establish a multi-
national Rapid Reaction Corps to respond to crises and
we expect Alliance forces, including those of the

United States, to be organized into multinational corps
that would function in peacetime, and notjust be con-
tingent structures activated in a crisis. We will also
exploit the prospect of longer warning time in the event
of a major crisis by backing up our deployed forces
with the ability to reinforce them with active and
reserve units from the United States, supported by the
ability to reconstitute larger forces over time should the
need arise.

The aftermath of the crisis in the Gulf portends a need
for some measure of continuing presence in that region
consistent with the desires and needs of our friends.
While the United States will not maintain a permanent
ground presence, we are committed to the region's
security. We will work with our friends to bolster their
confidence and security through such measures as
exercises, prepositioning of heavy equipment and an
enhanced naval presence. Our vital national interests
depend on a stable and secure Gulf.

Across the Pacific

Our enduring interests in East Asia and the Pacific also
demand forces sufficient to meet our responsibilities
and to sustain our long-term relationships with friends
and allies. While East Asia has been considerably less
affected by the Revolution of '89 than Europe, the
growing strength and self-reliance of our friends in the
region permit some reduction in our presence.

A phased approach, responding to global and regional
events, is the soundest. We have announced our intent
to adjust military personnel levels in the Philippines,
the Republic of Korea and Japan. This phase is
designed to thin out existing force structure and
reshape our security relationships. Before this phase
ends in December 1992, over 15,000 U.S. personnel
will be withdrawn. Later phases will reduce and reorga-
nize our force structure further, as circumstances per-
mit.

Korea represents the area of greatest potential danger,
and reductions there must be carefully measured
against North Korean actions. However, we have
judged that the growing strength of our Korean allies
permits us to reduce our presence and begin to move

28

toward a security partnership in which the Korean
armed forces assume the leading role. We are also
encouraged by the progress of the Japanese
Government in rounding out its own self-defense capa-
bilities.

The Rest of the World

In other regions, as the need for our presence persists,
we will increasingly rely on periodic visits, training
missions, access agreements, prepositioned equipment,
exercises, combined planning and security and human-
itarian assistance to sustain the sense of common inter-
est and cooperation on which we would rely in deploy-
ing and employing our military forces. As the Gulf crisis
clearly showed, our strategy is increasingly dependent
on the support of regional friends and allies. In fact —
during crises — the cooperation and support of those
local states most directly threatened will be critical fac-
tors in determining our own course of action.

CRISIS RESPONSE

Despite our best efforts to deter conflict, we must be
prepared for our interests to be challenged with force,
often with little or no warning. The Gulf crisis was
ample evidence that such challenges will not always be
small or easily resolved. Because regional crises are the
predominant military threat we will face in the future,
their demands — along with our forward presence
requirements — will be the primary determinant of the
size and structure of our future forces.

The regional contingencies we could face are many
and varied. We must be prepared for differences in ter-
rain, climate and the nature of threatening forces, as
well as for differing levels of support from host nations
or others. We must also be able to respond quickly and
effectively to adversaries who may possess cruise mis-
siles, modern air defenses, chemical weapons, ballistic
missiles and even large armor formations. Although our
forward deployed forces speed our ability to respond to
threats in areas like the Pacific or Europe, there are
other regions where threats, while likely to be less
formidable, may prove no less urgent.

Mobi I ity

In this new era, therefore, the ability to project our
power will underpin our strategy more than ever. We
must be able to deploy substantial forces and sustain

them in parts of the world where prepositioning of
equipment will not always be feasible, where adequate
bases may not be available (at least before a crisis) and
where there is a less developed industrial base and
infrastructure to support our forces once they have
arrived. Our strategy demands we be able to move men
and materiel to the scene of a crisis at a pace and in
numbers sufficient to field an overwhelming force. The
100-hour success of our ground forces in the war to lib-
erate Kuwait was stunning, but we should not allow it
to obscure the fact that we required six months to
deploy these forces. As our overall force levels draw
down and ourforward-deployed forces shrink, we must
sustain and expand our investment in airlift, seal ift and
— where possible — prepositioning. We must also
ensure unimpeded transit of the air and sea lanes and
access to space through maritime and aerospace supe-
riority. Our security assistance must, among other
things, enhance the ability of other nations to facilitate
our deployments. And, over the longer term, we must
challenge our technology to develop forces that are
lethal but more readily deployable and more easily sus-
tained than today's.

Readiness and Our Guard
and Reserve Forces

For almost two decades, our Total Force Policy has
placed a substantial portion of our military manpower
in high-quality, well-trained, well-equipped and early-
mobilizing Guard and Reserve units. Compared to
maintaining such a force in the active component, this
was a cost-effective strategy, a prudent response to an
international security environment where the predomi-
nant threat was major conflict in Europe or global war
with the Soviets, with warning of such a conflict mea-
sured in weeks or even days.

That environment has been transformed. Today we
must reshape our Guard and Reserve forces so that they
can continue their important contributions in new cir-
cumstances. While we still face the possibility of sud-
den conflict in many of the regional contingencies that
could concern us, these threats — despite their danger
— will be on a smaller scale than the threat formerly
posed by the Soviets and their Warsaw Pact allies. This
will allow a smaller force overall, but those units ori-
ented towards short-warning, regional contingencies
must be kept at high readiness.

Over time we will move to a Total Force that permits us
to respond initially to any regional contingency with
units — combat and support — drawn wholly from the
active component, except for a limited number of sup-
port and mobility assets. Since many supportfunctions
can be more economically maintained in the reserve
component, we will still rely on reserve support units in
any extended confrontation. The primary focus of
reserve combat units will be to supplement active units
in any especially large or protracted deployment. To
hedge against a future need for expanded forces to deal
with a renewed global confrontation, which — though
possible — is less likely and clearly less immediate
than previously calculated, some reserve combat units
will be retained in cadre status.

This approach will allow us to maintain a Total Force
appropriate for the strategic and fiscal demands of a
new era: a smaller, more self-contained and very ready
active force able to respond quickly to emerging
threats; and a reduced but still essential reserve compo-
nent with emphasis on supporting and sustaining active
combat forces, and — in particularly large or prolonged
regional contingencies — providing latent combat
capability that can be made ready when needed.

Even as we restructure for a new era, we will continue
to place a premium on the quality of our military per-
sonnel, the backbone of any effective fighting force.
True military power is measured by the professional
skills and dedication of our young men and women. In
six weeks and 100 decisive hours, today's military
proved it is the most skilled and effective fighting force
this Nation has ever possessed. As we make the adjust-
ments appropriate to a new environment, we will pre-
serve this precious resource.

RECONST/TUT/ON

Beyond the crisis response capabilities provided by
active and reserve forces, we must have the ability to
generate wholly new forces should the need arise.
Although we are hopeful for the future, history teaches
us caution. The 20th century has seen rapid shifts in the
geopolitical climate, and technology has repeatedly
transformed the battlefield. The ability to reconstitute is
what allows us safely and selectively to scale back and
restructure our forces in-being.

This difficult task will require us to invest in hedging
options whose future dividends may not always be

29

measurable now. It will require careful attention to the
vital elements of our military potential: the industrial
base, science and technology, and manpower. These
elements were easily accommodated in an era when
we had to maintain large standing forces, when we rou-
tinely invested heavily in defense R&D and when new
items of equipment were broadly and extensively pro-
duced. We will now have to work much more deliber-
ately to preserve them.

The standard by which we should measure our efforts is
the response time that our warning processes would
provide us of a return to previous levels of confronta-
tion in Europe or in the world at large. We and our
allies must be able to reconstitute a credible defense
faster than any potential opponent can generate an
overwhelming offense.

Manpower

Reconstitution obviously includes manpower.

Relatively large numbers of personnel, trained in basic
military skills, can be raised in one to two years. But
skilled, seasoned leaders — high-quality senior NCOs
and officers — require many years to develop and we
must preserve this critical nucleus to lead an expanding
military force. This must be reflected in how we man
active, reserve and cadre units over the long term.

Defense Technology

Another challenge will be to maintain our edge in
defense technology, even as we reduce our forces.
Technology has historically been a comparative advan-
tage for American forces, and we have often relied on it
to overcome numerical disparities and to reduce the
risk to American lives.

Our technological edge in key areas of warfare will be
even more important at lower levels of forces and fund-
ing, and in the complex political and military environ-
ment in which ourforces will operate. But maintaining
this margin will become increasingly difficult as access
to advanced weaponry spreads and as our defense
industry shrinks. Even in regional contingencies it will
not be uncommon for our forces to face high-techno|o-
gy weapons in the hands of adversaries. This spread of
advanced systems will surely erode the deterrent value
of our own — and our competitive edge in warfare —
unless we act decisively to maintain technological
superiority.

30

We will, of course, have to decide which technologies
we want to advance and how we will pursue them.
Our focus should be on promising, high-leverage areas,
especially those that play to our comparative advan-
tages and exploit the weaknesses of potential adver-
saries, whoever and wherever they may be. Stealth,
space-based systems, sensors, precision weapons,
advanced training technologies — all these proved
themselves in the Gulf, yet when these programs (and
others) were begun, no one foresaw their use against
Iraq. Our investment strategies must hedge against the
unknown, giving future Presidents the flexibility that
such capabilities provide.

We must be able to move promising research through
development to rapid fielding when changes in the
international environment so require. The "generation
|eaps" in technology and fielded systems that some
have suggested may not be possible. We will have to
build some systems, as the early production effort is a
vital component of technology development.
Production, even in limited numbers, will also facilitate
the development of innovative doctrine and organiza-
tional structures to make full use of the new technolo-
gies we field. In an era of tight fiscal constraints, our
development efforts must also strive to make our
weapons less expensive as well as more effective.

In the competition for scarce resources, emphasis on
technology development — to pursue those new capa-
bilities that may be most decisive in the longer term —
may mean accepting some continued risk in the near
term. But accepting such risk may well be prudent in a
period of reduced East-West tensions.

The Industrial Base

Providing and sustaining modern equipment to support
a rapid expansion of the armed forces is an equally dif-
ficult proposition. We will need a production base to
produce new systems and a maintenance and repair
base to support them. These requirements pose unique
problems, as reduced defense budgets are shrinking the
defense industrial sector overall. As we make procure-
ment and investment decisions, we will have to place a
value on the assured supply and timely delivery of
defense materials in time of crisis.

In the near term, some of these problems can be ame-
liorated by retaining and storing equipment from units
being deactivated. Over the longer term, however, as

stored equipment becomes obsolete, the issue becomes
our capability to expand production or use alternative
sources of supply. We will need the capacity for indus-
trial surge, accelerating orders that are already in the
pipeline. We will also have to plan for production from
new or alternative industrial capacity. It may also be
possible to reduce unneeded military specifications to
make greater use of items that can be created by the
commercial production base. Above all, we must con-
tinue to involve the creative resources of our national
economy and ensure that corporations continue to
have incentives to engage in innovative defense work.

A SMALLER AND
RES TRUC TURED FORCE

Ourfuture military will be smaller. Assuming there are
no unforeseen, worrisome trends in the security envi-
ronment, by mid-decade ourforce can be some 25 per-
cent smaller than the force we maintained in the last
days of the Cold War. The changes we have seen in the
overall international environment have made this
smaller force possible, and the increasing demands on
our resources to preserve the other elements of our
national strength have made it necessaw.

Minimum Essential Military
Forces — The Base Force

Yet these planned reductions will cut our forces to a
minimally acceptable level — to a Base Force below
which further reductions would not be prudent. These
minimum forces represent our national security insur-
ance policy and consist of four basic force packages:
Strategic Forces, At/antic Forces, Paciﬁc Forces and
Contingency Forces.

Our Strategic Forces must continue to meet the endur-
ing demands of nuclear deterrence and defense. The
conventional force packages provide forces for forward

presence as well as the ability to respond to crises. Our
Atlantic Forces will be postu red and trained for the
heavy threats characteristic of Europe and Southwest
Asia and must be modern and lethal enough to deal
with these threats. Paciﬁc Forces will be structured for
an essentially maritime theater, placing a premium on
naval capabilities, backed by the essential air and
ground forces for enduring deterrence and immediate
crisis response. U.S.-based reinforcements will be
lighter than those we envisage for the Atlantic, as befits
the potential contingencies in the Pacific. Contingency
Forces will include the Army's light and airborne units,
Marine expeditionary brigades, special operations
forces and selected air and naval assets. They will be
largely based in the United States and — since they
must be able to respond to spontaneous and unpre-
dictable crises — they will largely be in the active com-
ponent. At times, the quick deployment of such a force
in itself may be enough to head off confrontation. At
other times, we may need actually to employ this force
to deal with insurgencies, conduct anti-drug or anti-ter-
rorist operations, evacuate non-combatants or — as we
did in Desert Shield — be the first into action while
heavier forces are alerted and moved.

The reductions projected by the mid-1990s are dramat-
ic. It will be important to manage their pace rationally
and responsibly. We must accommodate the actions
taken in support of Desert Storm and Desert Shield and
we must be attentive to the professional skills of the
armed forces that have been built up over the past
decade — and which, as the war made clear, remain
vital to our national security. But now that the war has
been won, and as long as no unanticipated ominous
trends emerge, we will get back on the spending path
agreed to before hostilities began. Highly effective mili-
tary forces can be supported within the levels agreed to
by Congress in the 1990 Budget Agreement if we can
end unneeded programs, consolidate bases, streamline
procedures and adjust overall manpower levels without
arbitrary restrictions.

31

VI. Toward the 21st Century

The 20th century has taught us that security is indivisi-
ble. The safety, freedom and well-being of one people
cannot be separated from the safety, freedom and well-
being of all. Recently, the Gulf crisis strengthened this
sense of international community. Many of the underly-
ing forces now at work in the world are tending to draw
that global community even closer together.
Technology, especially the explosion of communication
and information, has accelerated the pace of human
contact. The growing acceptance of the democratic
ideal — evidenced in the erosion of totalitarianism and
the expansion of basic human freedoms — has also
brought the world closer together. The expansion of
commerce and the growing acceptance of market prin-
ciples have accelerated the movement toward interde-
pendence and the integration of economies. Even the
threats posed by the proliferation of weapons of enor-
mous destructiveness have begun to draw the commu-
nity of nations together in common concern.

As we move toward the 21st century, this interdepen-
dence of peoples will grow and will continue to
demand responsible American leadership. Guided by
the values that have inspired and nurtured our democ-
racy at home, we will work for a new world in which
peace, security and cooperation finally replace the con-
frontation of the Cold War, and overcome the kind of
threat represented by Iraq's aggression.

Developments in the Soviet Union and elsewhere have
set in motion a change in the strategic landscape as
dramatic as that which the Nation experienced when
Soviet policy first forced the Cold War upon us. The
great threat to global peace has ebbed and we now see
a Soviet state and society struggling to overcome severe
internal crisis. Notwithstanding the uncertainties about
the future course of the Soviet Union, that state's will-
ingness — indeed, in many ways, its ability —to pro-

ject power beyond its borders has been dramatically
reduced for the foreseeable future. Our strategy for this
new era recognizes the opportunities and challenges
before us, and includes among its principles:

- reinforcing the moral ties that hold our alliances
together, even as perceptions of a common security
threat change;

- encouraging the constructive evolution of the Soviet
Union, recognizing the limits ofour influence and
the continuing power of Soviet military forces;

- supporting the independence and vitality of the new
Eastern European democracies even as we deal with
the uncertainties of the Soviet future;

- championing the principles of political and econom-
ic freedom as the surest guarantors of human
progress and happiness, as well as global peace;

- working with others in the global community to
resolve regional disputes and stem the proliferation
of advanced weapons;

- cooperating with the Soviet Union and others in
achieving arms control agreements that promote
security and stability;

- reducing our defense burden as appropriate, while
restructuring our forces for new challenges;

- tending more carefully to our own economic com-
petitiveness as the foundation of our long-term
strength; and

- addressing the new global agenda of refugee flows,
drug abuse and environmental degradation.

33

We are a rich and powerful nation, and the elements of
our power will remain formidable. But our wealth and
our strength are not without limits. We must balance
our commitments with our means and, above all, we
must wisely choose now which elements of our
strength will best serve our needs in the future. This is
the challenge of strategy.

In this country we make such choices for peace just as
we make the awful choices of war — as a democracy.
When President and Congress work together to build
an effective security posture and policy — as was done
in the 1980s — we are successful. In the Gulf, our
armed forces benefitted from the legacy of investment
decisions, technological innovations, and strategic
planning that came in the decade before. Today's plan-
ning decisions will determine whether we are well or ill

34

prepared for the contingencies that will confront us in
the future.

This is a heavy responsibility, shared between the
President and Congress. We owe our servicemen and
women not only the best equipment, but also a coher-
ent strategy and posture geared to new realities. This
coherence can only come from a partnership between
the Branches. Divided, we will invite disasters. United,
we can overcome any challenge.

In the Gulf, the dictator guessed wrong when he doubt-
ed America's unity and will. The extraordinary unity we
showed as a Nation in the Gulf assured that we would
prevail. It also sent the message loud and clear that
America is prepared for the challenges of the future,
committed and engaged in the world, as a reliable ally,
friend and leader.

