NATIONAL
SECU RITY
STRATEGY

OF THE
UNITED STATES

I DISTRIBUTION &TATTY'

Approved for public T0155‘-C1
Distributicp Unlimited

J ARY 1 PLEASE RETURN TO:

BMD TECHNICAL INFORMATION CENTER
BALLISTIC MISSILE DEFENSE ORGANIZATION
7100 DEFENSE PENTAGON
WASHINGTON D.C. 20301-7100

L342‘? 3

Accession Number: 4298

Publication Date: Jan 01, 1993

Title: National Security Strategy of the United States

Corporate Author Or Publisher: White House, 1600 Pennsylvania AVe., NW, Washington, DC
Descriptors, Keywords: National Security Strategy US House President Defense International
Pages: 00021

Cataloged Date: Feb 04, 1993

Document Type: HC

Number of Copies In Library: 000002

Record ID: 26173

iNATRJNAL
SECURITY
STRATEGY”

OF THE
UNITED STATES

APPIO for roloase;
Dis ' ution Unlimited

890 €I90866

THE WHITE HOUSE
JANUARY 1993

QD:kt,rpr
UtStItzw.

For sale by the . . Governm

ent rmtmgofﬁce
Superintendent ofDocuments, 21 Stop: sso , ashmg'ton,DC 2040279323

ISBN O—16—O4-1599—3

I/P—7’ a W

Contents

Preface  i

II.

III.

IV.

The World as It Is  Our National Security
Challenges and Opportunities  1

What We Seek  Our National Interests
and Objectives  3

The Promotion of Peace and Democracy 
Our Policy Agenda  5

What we have achieved

How we can lead in collective
engagement in the near-term

How we can influence the future
Economic Progress at Home and
Opportunities Abroad 

Our Economic Agenda 9
What we have achieved

Our economic challenge

What we need to do

VI.

Security through Strength: Legacy and
Mandate  Our Defense Agenda  13

What we have achieved

How we can lead in collective
engagement in the near-term

How we can influence the future
The World as It Can Be  If We Lead

and Attempt to Shape It as Only
America Can ...21

Preface

American Leadership for
Peaceful Change

Our great Nation stands at a crossroads in history. We
have entered a world radically transformed in the last four
years. We have only to consider the following to under-
stand the fact that we have moved, in that short time span,
from one historical period into another:

- People and nations are introducing democratic and free
market institutions and values.

- Only a few years ago, Central America, Southeast Asia,
Southern Africa, and the Middle East were trapped in a
cycle of intractable violence and human misery. Today,
with the help of America, all are on the road to peace.

- The barbed wire fences and minefields that once divid-
ed Europe are no more. Millions of people on the other
side of the Iron Curtain have been liberated from tyran-
ny. With American help, the nations of Central and
Eastern Europe have begun to taste political and eco-
nomic freedom.

- Ourformer nemesis, the Soviet Union, so long an
enemy bristling with tanks pointed at Western Europe
and nuclear missiles aimed at us, is gone. The threat of
thermonuclear war has been radically reduced and the
danger that Soviet expansionism posed for forty years
has disappeared as well.

- The Communist ideology that reigned supreme from the
Brandenburg Gate to the Bering Strait is today, in most
of the world, discredited, despised, and discarded.

- The flow of oil vital to the economic well-being of the
United States and the industrialized world is secured.

Few of these achievements would have been possible with-
out the leadership of the United States of America. They
are testament to our enduring political, moral, economic,
and military strength. They are testament to our strategy of
containment and deterrence, to the dedication and sacri-
fice of the brave men and women of our armed forces, to
our foreign assistance prograrns and our diplomacy, and to
the support and spirit of the American people. More than
anything else, our achievements are testarnent to the values
that define us as a Nation — freedom, compassion, justice,
opportunity, the rule of law, and hope. The impoverished,
the oppressed, and the weak have always looked to the
United States to be strong, to be capable, and to care.
Perhaps more than anything else, they have depended on
us to lead. And lead we have.

We are indeed moving into a new era. It is an era that
holds great opportunities _ but also great dangers.
America has a fateful choice to make. We can choose to
lead the world into this most historic of transformations, or
we can choose, as we have earlier in this century, to turn
inward, abandon our leadership role, and accept whatever
results may follow. If we choose leadership, America can
seize the opportunities that will be offered, and reduce the
dangers that will surely confront us. Although we will
work with other nations, our status as the preeminent world
power with unique capabilities places great responsibilities
upon us. And, if we are to learn anything from the often
tragic history of this century, it is first that the future is
uncertain, and second, that the world needs the leadership
that only America can provide.

As the continuing turmoil in virtually every region of the
world underscores, we have not achieved a permanent
peace. Although the forces of integration are strongerthan
ever, new and in some cases dormant forces of fragmenta-
tion have also been unleashed. Even as the danger of glob-
al war recedes, the potential for smaller but still highly
destructive conflicts between nations and within nations is
growing. We simply do not and cannot know all the chal-
lenges that will arise in the future. What we do know is
that our citizens and our interests will be challenged again.
We must remain strong enough to protect and defend them.

We live in an interdependent world in which our hopes for
peace and prosperity at home are increasingly linked to the
success of our policies abroad. Looking to the future, our
success at home will depend more — not less — on the
same kind of global leadership we exercised throughout
the second half of the 20th century. It is equally clear that
America cannot hope to achieve its foreign policy goals
nor maintain its credibility abroad if it does not sustain its
economic dynamism and competitiveness at home. Thus,
renewing our domestic vitality — in economic productivi-
ty, investment, technology, education, and energy — is an
absolute prerequisite for our future.

Our policy has one overriding goal: real peace — not the
illusow and fragile peace maintained by a balance of ter-
ror, but an enduring democratic peace based on shared
values. Such a peace can only exist if it is based on the
rule of law. This is the peace we have enjoyed for decades
with former enemies such as Germany and Japan. It is the
peace we hope to forge with more recent adversaries of the
Warsaw Pact. It is the peace and liberty we wish upon
every region of the world, enabling free peoples and free
economies everywhere to flourish and to prosper.

Building such a peace is an historic challenge. In a few
short years, we have come fartherthan many would have
Imagined possible. But we still have far to go if historians
are to look back on the end of the 20th Century as the
beginning of an "Age of Democratic Peace."

This is no less than a summons to national greatness. But
meeting renewed and nearly impossible challenges is what
America is all about. I, for one, am fully confident in our
success. Let us enter this challenging period of transition to
a new era determined by our leadership and our commit-
ment that we, our children and grandchildren will live in
prosperity and security.

3%

I. The World As It Is...

Our National Security Challenges

and Opportunities

The collapse of the Soviet Union and our collective victory
in the Cold War have fundamentally changed the strategic
environment. That victory would have been impossible
without long-term American political, economic, and mili-
tary strength, without commitment and leadership, and
without strong, capable, and reliable allies. The new inter-
national environment has also been shaped by the victory
of the United States and its coalition allies in Iraq — the
first major post-Cold War conflict. Our experience in the
Gulf War demonstrated that we cannot be sure when or
where the next conflict will arise; that regions critical to our
interests must be defended; that the world must respond to
straightforward aggression; that international coalitions can
be forged, though they often will require American leader-
ship; that the proliferation of advanced weaponw repre-
sents a dear, present, and widespread danger; and that the
United States remains the nation whose strength and lead-
ership are essential to a stable and democratic world order.

The Challenges

Despite both these successes, the world remains a danger-
ous place. While we no longer face the single defining
threat which dominated our policy, budgets, force struc-
tures, and indeed our fears forforty years, multiple threats
to our security still remain. Today's challenges are more
complex, ambiguous and diffuse than ever before. They
are political, economic, and military; unilateral and multi-
lateral; short-and long-term.

Politically, we are challenged to help ensure the successful
transition of newly emerged and emerging democracies in
Eastern and Central Europe and the former Soviet Union.
Success in these efforts is vital to world stability. Fragile
democracies elsewhere must be nurtured to ensure that
there are no reversals in the process. Together with our
allies and friends, the United States must continue to foster

the Middle East peace process and to encourage democrat-
ic reform in China, North Korea, Vietnam, Laos, and Cuba,
where one quarter of the earth's population still lives under
Communist rule. We must also help shape our alliances as
well as regional and international structures to deal with
today's realities and anticipate tomorrow's challenges.
Every effort must be made to overcome chaos, and create
and sustain stability in a democratic international order.
Fundamentally, we must make clear America's steadfast-
ness and eliminate any perception that we will turn inward
once again and renounce our mandate for global leadership.

Economically, in the international marketplace, we face the
continuing challenge of protecting and broadening open
markets and of formidable economic competitors such as
Japan and Germany. The challenges of change and the
transition to a more open competitive trading system
demand a more flexible and skilled workforce, a dedica-
tion to quality and cost-efficient production, and a commit-
ment to expand open and free trade. We need to save and
invest more. We need to inhibit environmental degrada-
tion which, if left unchecked, will have an adverse, long-
term economic impact.

Militarily, global security is threatened by regional instabili-
ties which we may have to confront either to protect our
own citizens and interests or at the request of our allies or
the United Nations. We are threatened by the continued
proliferation of advanced conventional arms, ballistic mis-
siles of increasing range, and weapons of mass destruction;
by terrorism; and by the international drug trade.
Longstanding missions, such as humanitarian assistance,
must now be undertaken in the midst of civil war and anar-
chy. Peacekeeping and peace enforcement are more com-
plex than ever. Finally, we must continue to support the
concept of democratic civilian authority over national mili-
tary institutions. V\ﬁthout civilian control, democracy can-
not exist.

The Opportunities

There is a peace dividend. The United States is no longer
burdened by the enormous military requirements of global
containment. We have an unprecedented opportunity to
promote our interests rather than simply defend them, to
address simultaneously our domestic needs, and indeed to
shape our future both at home and abroad. Our interna-
tional opportunities and our domestic imperatives are, in
fact, interdependent.

Forthe first time in more than forty years, we are no longer
faced with the constant threat of World War III.

Democracy has been embraced by a majority of countries
around the world and our former adversaries are now our
partners. We face the future enjoying not only great credi-
bility in the eyes of the world, but also with more, and in
many cases stronger, friends and allies than ever before to
help shoulder the responsibilities and burdens. Multilateral
institutions such as the United Nations, the Conference on
Security and Cooperation in Europe, NATO, the
Organization of American States, the Asia-Pacific
Economic Cooperation forum and others are energized and
ready to confront new challenges. In combat and humani-
tarian operations, we have proven our ability to build
coalitions to achieve common objectives. Our economic
future lies more than ever in the global marketplace, our
economic well-being guaranteed by expanded trade
through such historic initiatives as the North American Free
Trade Agreement and the Uruguay Round of multilateral
trade talks.

We must seize our opportunities, both for the benefits that
will accrue to us, and to further the prospects for peace,

stability, and prosperity that can and should be shared by
others around the globe. We must lead because we can-
not otherwise hope to achieve a more democratic and
peaceful future in a world still rife with turmoil and con-
flict. If we shun this role, our own future will be shaped by
others.

The Domestic Imperative

In the final analysis, our national security requirements
must be viewed in the context of our overall national well-
being. While our underlying economic dynamism is
undoubted, we are challenged at home by government
budget deficits and a need to increase savings and invest-
ment. We need a tax and legal system that facilitates, not
burdens, economic progress. Our public infrastructure
requires substantial investment. We must overcome the
challenges of crime and drugs. We must ensure social
peace and racial harmony as national imperatives. We
must have an education system that makes our children the
equal of their international peers; we must promote job
training, improved health care, and welfare reform. Age-
old principles of personal responsibility, individual initia-
tive, and commitment to helping others must be strength-
ened.

Meeting the challenges of renewal at home only reaffirms
the need for continued American strength. At the same

ti me, the economic and social basis of our national
strength will be more important than ever before in deter-
mining our ability to be a force for good in the world.

II. What We Seek  Our National
Security Interests And Objectives

The vision of the world to which the United States aspires
is one of freedom, respect for human rights, free markets,
and the rule of law. Defining a new strategy to achieve
such a vision must begin with our national interests and
objectives, for these constitute the fundamental rationale
for all our domestic and international undertakings.

Foremost, the United States must ensure its security as a
free and independent nation, and the protection of its fun-
damental values, institutions, and people. This is a sover-
eign responsibility which we will not abdicate to any other
nation or collective organization.

Through a strategy of engagement and leadership, we seek:

- Global and regional stability which encourages peace-
ful change and progress. To this end, we have four
mutually supportive goals that guide our overall national
security efforts. These are protecting the United States
and its citizens from attack; honoring, strengthening,
and extending our historic, treaty and collective defense
arrangements; ensuring that no hostile power is able to
dominate or control a region critical to our interests;
and, working to avoid conflict by reducing sources of
regional instability and violence, limiting the prolifera-
tion of advanced military technology and weapons of
mass destruction, and strengthening civil-military institu-
tions while reducing the economic burdens of military
spending.

- Open, democratic and representative political systems
worldwide. In our own actions and in concert with oth-
ers, we should foster open and democratic systems that
secure human rights and respect for every citizen, and
work to strengthen respect for international norms of
conduct. The active promotion of increased political

participation, especially now in Eastern Europe and the
former Soviet Union, is in our national interest — history
teaches that representative governments responsive to
their people are least likely to turn to aggression against
their neighbors. Democracies also ensure individual
civil and human rights, support economic freedom, and
promote stability.

An open international trading and economic system
which beneﬁts all participants. A global economic sys-
tem which encourages the free movement of goods,
capital and labor is also one which best contributes to
our prosperity and to that of others. Steady, non-inf|a-
tionary economic growth will help reduce social and
political tensions, thus contributing to global peace, and
will also provide a means for ensuring the health of our
environment.

An enduring global faith in America — that it can and
will lead in a collective response to the world's crises.
This does not mean that the United States must tackle
every international problem as its own, or that we must
postpone addressing our own domestic imperatives
while we devote attention and resources to international
demands. But new democracies need our help to sur-
vive and flourish. That does not mean that we can solve
their problems or that our solutions should be theirs, but
rather that we cannot shirk our responsibility to help.
There are limits to what we can or should do — we will
have to be selective and discriminate in our global
undertakings. But others have responsibilities as well.
We also need to encourage the active engagement of
our allies and friends. But often these collective efforts
will not prove possible unless we take the lead. We
cannot ever allow our stated preference for multilateral
action to become simply an excuse for American inaction.

Ill. The Promotion Of Peace And
Democracy  Our Policy Agenda

America has been blessed with an abundance of natural
and human resources and a people committed to freedom
and democracy. Because ofour strength, others have been
able to lift themselves up from the ravages of war, improve
their economies, free themselves from totalitarianism, and
take the first hopeful steps toward a better way of life. In
today's world, we face new and diverse international and
domestic challenges that will require flexibility in the com-
mitment of the various resources of national power and
influence. We must focus anew on meeting economic
challenges and on fostering democracy worldwide. Our
influence will increasingly be defined more by the quality
of our ideas, values, and leadership, and by our competi-
tiveness in the international marketplace, than by the pre-
dominance of our military capabilities.

What We Have Achieved

As we look back on more than four decades of Cold War,
the United States can be proud of many accomplishments.

Perhaps most important, by providing the stability that
allowed for peaceful change, we nurtured a democratic
community of nations — a "zone of peace" among the
Western Hemisphere, Western Europe, and Japan, Australia
and the newly industrializing economies of East Asia. In
Latin America, we have come very close to our goal ofa
democratic hemisphere, with elected heads of government
in every countw except Cuba, and the principle of the con-
sent of the governed now firmly established. Europe is
whole and free. Our continued presence in Asia centered
on our alliance with Japan has ensured unprecedented sta-
bility in the region.

In crafting a post-war foreign policy based on containment,
we defended the Free World against Communist expan-
sion and aggression. We provided an environment of

deterrence in which the Communist system succumbed to
its internal contradictions. We provided an inspiring politi-
cal and economic alternative which demonstrated the
bankruptcy of that system. We forged the strong military
alliances which helped maintain peace, manage crises, set-
tle conflicts and made containment work.

Remembering how in the 1930s economic conﬂicts exac-
erbated political conflict, the United States took the lead
in laying the foundation for a global economic system
based on multilateral cooperation, liberalized trade, inter-
national institutions for financial cooperation and develop-
ment assistance, and other mechanisms. These institutions
are proving their worth today in responding to the new
challenges of aiding the former Communist countries.

The United States has taken the lead both to defeat
aggression, notably in the Persian Gulf, and to promote
peaceful resolution of longstanding conflicts, such as in
the Middle East, which threaten international peace and
our vital interests.

And finally, for forty years, the United States served as
both symbol and spokesman for democracy world-wide.
The United States has promoted democracy and political
pluralism in Eastern and Central Europe, and in the former
Soviet Union where our former adversaries seek advice as
they make the transition from totalitarianism to democracy.
Our efforts in Africa have been extensive as well. We have
encouraged independence in Namibia; presidential elec-
tions in Benin; steps toward a multiparty system in
Ethiopia; elections in Zambia, Gabon, the Ivory Coast, and
the Congo; and movement toward democracy in Angola
and free, democratic, and representative government in
South Africa. Democracy was the ideology on which our
victory in the Cold War was based, and it continues to be
the only system which guarantees individual civil and
human rights.

Preceding Page Blank

How We Can Lead In Collective
Engagement In The Near Term

Despite these successes, there are peoples who do not yet
enjoy freedom or who are still in the process of transition
— peoples looking for guidance and who need our help.
Democracies can be fragile and must be nurtured.
Elections by themselves are no panacea. Representative
institutions must be built with persistence and democratic
principles fostered widely so that undemocratic forces can-
not manipulate the process. It is in our national interest to
help the democratic community of nations continue to
grow while ensuring stability. Our global leadership in this
endeavor must adapt, however, in the context of new inter-
national trends: the renewed effectiveness of multinational
organizations, particularly the United Nations and the
Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe; the
greater diffusion of power that has accompanied the end of
the Cold War; and the increasing necessity to build coali-
tions to advance common interests.

For the United States to lead effectively in the political
arena, there are several steps we must take.

- The key to our success has been — and will continue to
be — our partnerships with the industrial and other
major democracies. In concert, we must support stabil-
ity and economic and political reform in Eastern
Europe and the former Soviet Union — our number-
one foreign policy priority today. We should do so
through firm political support for reform movements and
through the extension of broad-based government and
non-government assistance. This includes macro-eco-
nomic support to enhance the prospects for long-term
institutional reform, technical economic assistance, and
humanitarian and medical assistance to promote short-
term stability. More than anything else, our encourage-
ment of private trade and investment will help these
countries integrate themselves into the free market eco-
nomic system. In addition, we are implementing a wide
variety of exchange programs and other initiatives
designed to promote closer political relationships
between our countries. Nothing would more profound-
Iy enhance our security than to have our former adver-
saries succeed in establishing stable democratic, free-
market systems. Nothing would so cloud our future
security than to see them fail. After sacrificing so much

to contain and defeat Communism, we must act to
assure its replacement by democracy, freedom, and
human rights.

- We must also work to support, encourage, and consoli-
date democracy elsewhere around the world, both
multilaterally and bilaterally. Our tools include a vigor-
ous public diplomacy conducted by the USIA, the Voice
ofAmerica, and Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, and
successful assistance programs focused on democratic
institution-building such as the National Endowment for
Democracy and the International Militaw Education and
Training program. These efforts should continue. We
should strive to bring stable democracy and free markets
to lands that have little knowledge of them, strengthen
democratic institutions where they are fragile and threat-
ened. Where authoritarianism still dominates, we
should continue to explain ourselves and to provide fac-
tual information and hope. Maintaining our own high
standard of democratic practice and the rule of law is
vital to our ability to lead by example.

- We must continue to champion a fair, politically sus-
tainable international refugee and immigration regime
for the post-Cold War era. Our efforts to promote
democracy and free-market prosperity should help
reduce the flow of refugees and emigrants. The United
States should continue to assist governments, regional
organizations, and international institutions such as the
United Nations in providing humanitarian assistance to
refugees and displaced persons and in establishing
processes for free and orderly movement of peoples. At
the same time, we must expect others in the world com-
munity to work to provide economic opportunity for
their peoples.

As we provide American leadership to extend the "zone of
peace" and enhance the forces of integration that are evi-
dent in the new world, we must also provide American
leadership to inhibit the forces of fragmentation that threat-
en order, peace and stability.

How We Can Inﬂuence The
Future

At the United Nations...

The most desirable and efficient security strategy is to
address the root causes of instability and to ease tensions
before they result in conflict. V\ﬁth the paralyzing divisions
of the Cold War now over, the United Nations has been
given a new lease on life, emerging as a central instrument
for the prevention and resolution of conflicts and the
preservation of peace. But the requirement for U.N. action
has increased dramatically and now includes everything
from election monitoring, preventive diplomacy and tradi-
tional peacekeeping to humanitarian relief, facilitating the
stable transition of previously belligerent states back into
the community of Nations, and monitoring compliance
with Security Council resolutions. The U.N. has undertak-
en fifteen new operations in the last four years alone, from
Angola, El Salvador, the Western Sahara, Cambodia and
Yugoslavia, to Iraq/Kuwait, Somalia, Mozambique, and
Afghanistan.

In concert with others, the United States must renew its
efforts to improve the recent effectiveness of the United
Nations. As was demonstrated in the Gulf War and in sub-
sequent crises, we now have the opportunity to make the
United Nations a key instrument of collective security. The
United States should do it partto strengthen U.N. conflict
prevention, peacekeeping and peacemaking capabilities by:

- participating in, supporting and contributing to long
overdue reform of the U.N. system to increase the orga-
nization's capability to perform these and other impor-
tant roles;

- creating a new Fund for Peace to help pay America's
share of the greater demands for United Nations peace-
keeping. We should pay all arrearages to the U.N. as
planned and ensure timely payment of future assess-
ments;

- ta.king an active role in the full spectrum of U.N. peace-
keeping and humanitarian relief planning and support;
and

- helping to strengthen international efforts to combat the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction by ma king
the U.N. Security Council a key forum for nonpro-
Iifeation activities.

Regionally 

While the United States emerged from the Cold War as the
world's preeminent power, we have neither the desire nor
the ability to be the world's "policeman." Regional solu-
tions to regional problems are the most enduring path to
peace. We should support those efforts, helping to facili-
tate the regional process whenever possible. Regional
organizations should be utilized to contribute to building a
broader consensus behind international endeavors. The
international coa|ition's victory in the Gulf War created
conditions favorable to the Middle East peace process,
bringing adversaries together to resolve their differences
peacefully. We should continue to be a catalyst, an honest
broker and a full partner in that process.

Each region of the world has it own unique set of political,
economic and militaw challenges.

- In Europe, the North Atlantic Alliance remains central to
our security, and the Conference on Security and
Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) is taking on important
new roles in the resolution of conflict and the promotion
of democracy. We should work to strengthen the
NATO alliance and adapt it to new tasks; help enhance
the CSCE in it new role; and promote dialogue, cooper-
ation, and mutual security for all nations of NATO,
Central and Eastern Europe. We should continue to par-
ticipate in the evolution of a European security identity.

- In the former Soviet Union, we will provide expertise,
including implementation of the Freedom Support Act,
to assist the new states in building representative politi-
cal systems and market economies, and foster coopera-
tive regional and international relations. We will work
with them to promote peaceful solutions to the ethnic
crises on their borders which threaten stability in
Eurasia. We will also work toward the peaceful solution
of ethnic and nationalistic tensions and crises in Eastern
Europe and the Balkans.

- In Asia, our agenda is five-fold. First, the United States
must maintain a strategic framework which reﬂects its
status as a Pacific power and promotes its engagement
in Asia. The key to the United States’ strategic frame-
work has been, and will continue to be, it alliance with
Japan. Second, we must continue to expand market
through bilateral, regional, and multilateral arrange-

ment. Third, we must carefully watch the emergence
of China onto the world stage and support, contain, or
balance this emergence as necessary to protect U.S.
interests. Fourth, we must continue to play a critical
role in the peaceful unification process on the Korean
peninsula. Finally, we should encourage the normaliza-
tion of Indochina and the expansion and development
of the Association of East Asian Nations.

In Latin America, the Organization of American States
(OAS) was involved in the highly complex effort to bring
an end to the war in Nicaragua and to defend democra-
cy in Peru and Haiti. We should work to enhance the
OAS as an instrument for the promotion and defense of
democracy. But without economic growth, little
progress is possible. The principles underlying the
Enterprise for the Americas Initiative are basic to eco-
nomic development and the achievement of democratic
goals. Both Haiti's and Cuba's peaceful return to
democracy remains an unwavering objective.

In Africa, the Organization of African Unity, along with
a number of international organizations, is actively
working to address the continent's needs and problems.
The United States supports these and other efforts such
as the Economic Community of West Africa, foresees
the expansion of their importance, and should provide
appropriate assistance. Our leadership in Operation
RESTORE HOPE is designed to encourage other nations
to contribute to the amelioration of the human condition
there, laying the foundation for continued economic
and political progress.

In the Middle East, the U.S.-initiated peace process has
brought together regional and extra-regional govern-
ments in bilateral and multilateral negotiations aimed at
resolving conﬂict, fostering arms control and regional
stability, and promoting economic and technical coop-
eration. We will continue to support these efforts as
well as those of the Gulf Cooperation Council to
enhance stability in that vital area.

IV. Economic Progress At Home And
Opportunities Abroad 
Our Economic Agenda

National prosperity and national security are mutua||y-sup-
portive goals. Indeed, in the most tangible ways — eco-
nomic prosperity and freedom from foreign dangers — all
Americans have gained enormously from the success of
our global leadership. Our commitment to an open world
trading system, especially, has helped America, a trading
nation since its birth, to grow and prosper. And today we
depend on the global economy more than at anytime in
our history — a dependence that will certainly increase in
the future.

What We Have Achieved

Maintaining a strong domestic economy and helping our
friends and allies grow and prosper have been core ele-
ments in our national security strategy since 1945. U.S.
policies which aided the economic rebirth of Europe and
Japan after World War II enabled them to play major roles
in containing the spread of Communism. Indeed, one of
the clearest lessons of the collapse of Communism is that
without an economic system that allows for personal free-
dom and initiative, there can be no lasting political or mili-
tary strength.

America's postwar policies have provided leadership so
that the industrial democracies have chosen to work
together, rather than pursue the destructive economic
nationalism of the inter-war period. The progressive reduc-
tion of trade barriers has raised living standards significant-
Iy. Ideas, capital, goods and services now move around
the world with increasing speed, expanding economic
opportunity. Efforts to help developing nations are now
well established in the international financial institutions
and national policies of developed countries. Major
progress in democracy, economic reform and develop-

ment, human right and security in the Western
Hemisphere has been achieved through the new coopera-
tion embodied in our Enterprise for the Americas Initiative.
New governments committed to democratic ideals and
market-based economics have now replaced ourformer
Communist adversaries in Eastern Europe and the Soviet
Union.

Our Economic Challenge

A top national security priority today must be to strengthen
economic performance at home and economic leadership
abroad. Effective participation in the global economy will
be a key factor in our future prosperity and security. In
1991, U.S. foreign trade exceeded $1.2 trillion, twenty-one
percent of our gross national product. The United States is
the world's largest exporter of goods and services, with
1991 sales totaling $591 billion. Over seven and one-half
million jobs are linked directly to our exports.

The distinction between domestic economic policy and
international economic policy is disappearing. While suc-
cessful international businesses already operate largely on
such a basis, government have been slow to respond to
this reality. United States’ economic strategy must be glob-
al rather than national. It must include increased attention
to the range of new issues on our agenda: environmental
degradation, population pressures in developing countries,
migration and refugees, disease and other health problems.

What We Need To Do

America's longer term economic position in the world will
be determined by how well we succeed in:

- strengthening economic competitiveness through sound
monetary and fiscal policies, greater savings and invest-

ment;

- improving our infrastructure and our education system;
- ensuring our lead in the crucial technologies of a new era;

- convincing others that free trade offers greater prosperity
than managed trade or protected markets;

- supporting market economies in all regions of the world;
and

- enhancing the effectiveness of the institutions,national
and international, needed to sustain a global market
economy.

This is a long—term mission which will require the active
participation of all Americans. Only a consistent growth
strategy for the next ten to fifteen years can make signifi-
cant progress in reforming our economy and sustaining
U.S. economic leadership in the world.

At home, our long—term growth strategy must include:

- sustained measures to bring federal spending more into
Ii ne with available resources and to Iowerthe federal
deficit significantly;

- prudent monetary policy to support economic growth
while ensuring continued low inflation and stable prices;

- greater national savings to reduce the cost of capital for
productive sectors of the economy;

- increased investment, particularly in research and devel-
opment;

- reducing the burden of taxation, regulation, and litiga-
tion on our economy;

- raising educational performance, particularly pre-school
through high school, and implementing reforms to
enhance parental control and choice;

10

- greater efficiency in the use of energy, particularly oil,
through market mechanisms, not regulation;

- improved infrastructure, particularly in transportation
and communication; and

- new approaches to dealing with societal ills which sap
our economic strength.

Updating Our International Economic
Policy

As we revitalize the domestic economy, we must also
rethink our foreign economic policy. Most important, we
need to recognize that only through joint action with our
economic partners will we be able to achieve our interna-
tional economic objectives. Thanks to our economic
strength and genuine commitment to an open international
economic system, we can play a unique guiding role. But
increasingly, the United States is viewed as first among
equals, not dominant, in international economic fora. We
cannot dictate to others, but we can encourage them to
cooperate.

Our priorities for the next decade should include action to:

- Improve economic policies and performance among the
major industrial countries to promote sustained global
economic growth. Macroeconomic policy coordination,
particularly among the G-7, needs to be strengthened.

- Continue promoting global and regional trade liberaliza-
tion. Globally, we need to bring the Uruguay Round to
a successful conclusion and lay the groundwork in the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) for fur-
ther multilateral trade liberalization and more effective
adjudication of trade disputes. Regionally, now that we
have concluded the North American Free Trade
Agreement, we should press ahead with the Enterprise
for the Americas Initiative, building the foundation for
free trade agreement with other Latin American coun-
tries. We should also explore the possibility of arrange-
ments leading to free trade agreement with countries in
other regions, such as Asia and Europe, where we have
Important interests.

- Ensure that relations with the European Community
remain on a sound footing through regular high-level
political and economic consultations. Building on more

than a decade of trade negotiations, we need an
improved understanding with Japan on resolving trade
differences and increasing market access for foreign
goods. The Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation forum
should be used to strengthen trade relations and pro-
mote further liberalization in Asia.

- Fundamentally rethink national and international strate-
gies to assist development in poorer countries. With a
few exceptions, the results of foreign aid have not been
commensurate with the resources expended.
Signiﬁcantly greater emphasis must be place on market-
oriented structural reforms.

Continue the cooperative effort with our allies and the
international financial institutions to supportthe success-
ful transformation of Eastern Europe and the former
Soviet Union to market-based economies integrated into
the global market place. In addition to providing ade-
quate financial aid and technical assistance, we need to
ensure that these countries have access to markets
abroad to encourage trade and private-sector growth.

- Strengthen the international financial and economic
institutions — the World Bank, the IMF, the OECD, the
GATT and the regional development banks — so they
can effectively meet the challenges posed by a dramati-
cally evolving world economy. International financial
institutions must give greater emphasis to supporting the
private sector and developing sound market-based poli-
cles.

- Likewise, reassess and realign as necessary the econom-
ic mandate of various United Nations bodies. Particular
attention should be given to the Food and Agriculture
Organization (FAO), the U.N. Industrial Development
Organization (UNIDO), the U.N. Committee on Trade
and Development (UNCTAD), the Economic and Social
Council (ECOSOC), and the ﬁve regional U.N. econom-
ic commissions.

Building Government Institutions to
Serve the Future

We must complete the process of streamlining and restruc-
turing U.S. government institutions. Most of our institu-
tions dealing with economic issues either date from before
1940 or were created during the Cold War. Coordination
within the government can be improved; duplication of

activities should be eliminated. We need to re-examine
the entire government apparatus — agency structure, per-
sonnel and practices — to ensure the most efficient policy-
making under new conditions.

We need also emphasize the importance of an active U.S.
international role. Many of our overseas diplomatic activi-
ties directly support U.S. jobs and create opportunities for
business to expand. We should restructure the various
agencies of the U.S. government engaged in export promo-
tion to ensure a coherent, coordinated approach. In re-
evaluating our approaches to trade promotion, we should
focus on key areas of trade competitiveness and work with
the private sector to tailor programs to meet specific needs.

Bilateral Development Assistance

Just as the United States saw that it was in its national inter-
est to help Europe and Japan overcome the devastation of
World War II, so too is it in our interest to help former
Communist countries overcome the ravages of central
planning and excessive state control. But the Executive
and Congress mustjoin these countries in casting aside old
thinking, especially in deciding how to use and when to
provide foreign assistance. U.S. foreign assistance pro-
grams and management both must be thoroughly reorient-
ed in support of our economic policy. Numerous commis-
sions and experts have advocated fundamental reform of
our foreign assistance structure and priorities. The end of
the Cold War provides an excellent opportunity for under-
taking needed reform.

Ourforeign aid program should focus to the maximum
extent on sound economic policies in recipient countries
and the promotion of the private sector. The goal of for-
eign assistance should be to reduce dependency, not pro-
long it. The most effective use of foreign aid occurs when
recipient countries follow free market principles and build
pluralistic democratic institutions. Adherence to such prin-
ciples stimulates international trade and investment, which
are vastly more important than the relatively small flows of
official international assistance.

The Environment

Environmental degradation is one of the most pressing
global problems. Deforestation, climate change, air and
water pollution, and depletion of water supplies have far-
reaching effects on the capacity of countries to sustain eco-

11

nomic growth and ensure a healthy environment for their
citizens. Environmental problems transcend national
boundaries. Air and water pollution in one country can
affect far distant countries as well as those nearby. Some
problems, such as ozone depletion and climate change,
can have a global impact. In many developing countries,
environmental degradation is already causing serious
health problems and limiting economic development.

Addressing these environmental issues requires a global
effort. The United States has established some of the
strictest environmental standards in the world, and we need
to live up to them. However, we are not immune to the
effects of environmental degradation elsewhere. The
United States is already playing an active role in supporting
multinational environmental programs, population control
initiatives, and research on global problems. We will con-
tinue to advance international cooperation on environmen-
tal issues and supportthis effort with adequate funding. We
especially need to ensure that environmental concerns are

12

integrated fully into our overall economic and trade poli-
cies. Economic growth and environmental protection can
be made complementary objectives to be pursued together.

Space

We need to continue to use the unique environment of
space to investigate new materials and medicines, develop
new sources of energy, and find solutions to environmental
problems on earth. This will require an invigorated and
better integrated defense and commercial space effort. We
must encourage multinational efforts as well. Significant
success has been achieved in conjunction with the
European Space Agency, the former Soviet Union, and
other nations supporting Space Station Freedom, a mission
focused on improving life on earth. In addition, we should
promote policies which encourage private investment in
space. This will help create jobs, boost the economy and
strengthen our science, engineering, and industrial base.

V. Security Through Strength: Legacy and
Mandate... Our Defense Agenda

Our strategy has shifted from a focus on a global threat to
one on regional challenges and opportunities, from con-
tainment to a new regional defense strategy. The demise of
the global threat posed by Soviet Communism leaves
America and its allies with an unprecedented opportunity
to preserve with greater ease a security environment within
which our democratic ideals can prosper. Where once a
European-wide war, potentially leading to nuclear
exchange, was theoretically only weeks and yards away,
today such a threat has receded and would take years to
rekindle. With the end of the Cold War, there are no sig-
nificant hostile alliances. We have a substantial lead in
critical areas of warfare. The combination of these trends
has given our Nation and our alliances great depth for our
strategic position.

Indeed these alliances, built during our struggle of contain-
ment, are one of the great sources of our strength in this
new era. They represent a community of democratic
nations bound together by a web of political, economic,
and security ties and offer a framework for security not
through competitive rivalries in arms, but through coopera-
tive approaches and collective security institutions. Yet,
even as we hope to rely increasingly on collective
approaches to solve international problems, we recognize
that a collective response will not always be timely, and, in
the absence of American leadership, may not be feasible.

Simply put, we should strive to shape an uncertain future to
preserve strategic depth — won at great sacrifice — and to
enhance it in ways that would help preclude hostile non-
democratic powers from dominating regions critical to our
interests. During the global struggle of the Cold War,
developments in even remote areas could affect the United
States’ relative position in the world, and therefore often
required a U.S. response. Today, the United States remains
a nation with global interests, but we must reexamine
whether and how particular challenges threaten our inter-
ests. A clear understanding of our interests and responsibil-

ities along with the growing strength of our friends and
allies will allow us to be more selective in determining
whether U.S. forces must be committed.

Guided by this new regional defense strategy, we are
reducing our forces significantly _ by almost a quarter —
to their lowest level in terms of manpower since before the
Korean war. Yet, even as we reduce the size of ourforces,
we must not destroy their quality or their technological
superiority. Along with alliances, high-quality personnel
and technological superiority represent capabilities that
would take decades to restore if foolishly lost in this time of
reductions.

While we no longer face the possibility of a Soviet-led
Warsaw Pact attack on Europe, regional instabilities contin-
ue to threaten our interests and our security. The world
remains unpredictable and over-armed, and nations have
not eliminated the age-old temptation to use force or intim-
idation to achieve their ends. The end of the Cold War has
coincided with a virtual explosion of long-dormant ethnic
and aggressive nationalistic tensions around the world,
many of which have degenerated into international crises.
Proliferation, terrorism, and the international drug trade still
threaten stability.

The United States must continue to provide the leadership
necessary to encourage and sustain cooperation among our
allies, friends, and new partners in meeting the challenges
that we will inevitably encounter in the future. We must
continue to stay engaged, thereby preventing the emer-
gence either ofa new global threat or a vacuum in a region
critical to our interests. Nations will depend on America's
strength, readiness and leadership in the years to come as
much as they did during the Cold War and the Gulf crisis.
Neither for their sake nor for our own can we afford any-
thing less than the most capable, best equipped, and best
led military in the world.

13

What We Have Achieved

During the Cold War, our refusal to be intimidated by
expansionist Soviet policies or massive militaw build-up,
our willingness to counter that build-up, and our deploy-
ment of forces overseas all helped provide a shield against
Soviet aggression. That allowed democracy to develop
and flourish around the world. The Cold War is over —
not because America passively waited, but because we led
the way. We led by maintaining our own highly-capable
military and through continued engagement in both Europe
and Asia. On the whole, our policies deterred conflict and
kept pressure on the Soviet Union which ultimately col-
lapsed from within. We helped our democratic allies in
Europe and Asia not only to counterthe Communist threat,
but also to become strong enough politically and economi-
cally to help bear the burden of the common defense.
Finally, the transformation of the Soviet Union has enabled
us to achieve unprecedented new reductions in the strate-
gic nuclear arsenals of both sides and a series of agree-
ments on conventional and chemical weapons.

Most recently, our commitment and leadership in the Gulf
War sustained the confidence and respect of the world.
More than half a million men and women of our armed
forces helped carw out an historic campaign to liberate
Kuwait and stop Saddam Hussein from dominating the
region and essentially controlling global energy resources.
The quality, training, technological sophistication, and
logistics expertise of our Armed Forces, together with
superb military planning and leadership, produced a swift
victory.

The United States has assisted many nations around the
globe in building their own self-defense capabilities, thus
countering the sense of vulnerability that tends to spur arms
races and weapons proliferation. We have also assisted in
humanitarian efforts following natural disasters, in peace-
keeping operations, in infrastructure development, and
through military-to-military programs, in helping numerous
countries make the transition to democratic systems.

Beginning in 1990, the United States embarked on a
wholesale reconfiguring of our armed forces for the post-
Cold War era, consistent with a new vision of the strategic
environment. We have struck an effective balance by
downsizing and restructuring significantly and quickly
without making precipitous cut which could tempt aggres-
sors or cause allies to doubt our resolve and capabilities.

14

How We Can Lead In Collective
Engagement In The Near Term

The Defense Program

The fundamental elements of our national defense strategy
— strategic deterrence and defense; forward presence; cri-
sis response; and reconstitution — a_re clea.rly defined and
will remain valid for the foreseeable future.

- Strategic Deterrence and Defense. Deterring nuclear
attack remains our top priority. We must still possess
modern strategic nuclear forces and a reliable warning
system. We must develop a system for global protection
against limited ballistic—missile attack. We must main-
tain responsive, highly trained, technologically sophisti-
cated, and broadly capable conventional and uncon-
ventional forces. We must maintain and improve space
systems integral to strategic and tactical operations
worldwide.

- Forward Presence. While reducing our forward-
deployed forces, we are redefining our presence abroad
with combined exercises, new access and storage agree-
ments, security and humanitarian assistance, port visits,
military—to—military contacts, and periodic and rotational
deployments. Our forward presence forces and opera-
tions lend credibility to our alliances and ensure the per-
ception that a collective response awaits any threat to
our interests or to those of our allies.

- Crisis Response. We must maintain an adequate capa-
bility to project power in response to crises should our
efforts to deter conﬂict fail. The very existence of a
robust crisis response capability strengthens deterrence.
Our force structure must be ﬂexible enough to ensure
we can fulfill both traditional and non—traditional
requirements. In addition, the capability to generate
decisive combat power, if and when needed, strength-
ens our ability to terminate a given conﬂict swiftly on
terms favorable to us and with minimum loss of life.
The precise nature of our response to a crisis will, of
course, depend on the interests at stake, our commit-
ments to the nations involved, the level and sophistica-
tion of the threat, and on the capabilities of U.S. and
allied forces.

' Reconstitution. As we reduce the size of our military
forces in response to the demise of the global threat, we
must ensure that we continue to deter potential adver-
saries from militarizing and, if deterrence fails, retain the
capability to recreate a global warfighting capability.
This "reconstitution" capability involves forming, train-
ing, and fielding new fighting units from cadres; mobi-
lizing previously trained or new manpower; and activat-
ing the industrial base on a large scale. Reconstitution
also involves maintaining technology, doctrine, training,
experienced military personnel, and innovation neces-
sary to retain the competitive edge in decisive areas of
potential military competition.

We must capitalize on ourtraditional strengths, learn from
our experience in DESERT STORM, and‘ plan forfuture
contingencies in which our challengers will have learned
some of the same lessons. We must maintain land, mar-
itime, and aerospace as well as technological superiority.
We must improve our ability to conduct coalition opera-
tions, project power by expanding our air and sealift capa-
bilities as well as by enhancing the inter-theater strategic
agility of our forces. We must look for new and innovative
ways for our armed forces to make a long—term contribu-
tion to peace and stability through assisting the militaries of
Eastern and Central Europe, the former Soviet Union, and
elsewhere around the globe in the transition to democracy.
The new George C. Marshall European Center for Security
Studies is an excellent example of such an initiative.

In the final analysis, our armed forces must be prepared to
respond rapidly, to deter, and, if necessary, to fight and win
unilaterally or as part of a coalition.

The Defense Industrial Base

The defense industrial base is a critical element ofour
national security. It is a complicated network of contract-
ing, subcontracting, and vendorfirms, as well as Defense
Department maintenance depots. We rely upon the indus-
trial base forthe cost efficient manufacture, maintenance
and modernization of technologically superior weapon sys-
tems and munitions over the long term in peacetime and
for the timely delivery of the goods and services required
by our armed forces in times of crisis or conflict.

In peacetime, the industrial base must provide an advanced
research and development capability, ready access to civil-
ian technology, and a continuous design and prototyping
capability. Increased focus must be placed on innovative

manufacturing techniques that provide the capability to
incorporate rapidly and cost effectively the most advanced
technological improvements into our armed forces.

In conﬂict, the industrial base must be capable of surging
production of essential warfighting items prior to and dur-
ing a contingency operation. In addition, the industrial
base must have the capacity to restore, in a reasonable
period, the war reserve stockpiles of items that were con-
sumed. Finally, the industrial base must be able to recon-
stitute forces in order to respond to the reemergence of a
global threat.

As the national defense budget declines over the near- to
mid-term, we must ensure that the industrial base providers
of unique, critical peacetime, conflict and reconstitution-
related capabilities are available when needed. In order to
do this, we need to examine such things as:

° Recent and projected trends in our ability to surge mili-
tary production in crises or wartime.

' Unique critical industrial capabilities affected by
changes in current and projected defense acquisition
programs.

- Allied potential to provide these criticalcapabilities, and
how much we should rely on outside sources.

° Technologies that are likely to emerge which could off-
set the loss of critical-component suppliers for current
and near-to mid-term weapon systems and platforms.

° Other major factors which could ensure a viable defen-
seindustrial base capable of supporting modernization
or reconstitution of forces over the long—term.

Important initiatives are already underway. National
Technology Initiatives will provide opportunities to rely
more heavily upon new technological advances with sig-
nificant commercial applications. The Defense Conversion
Commission is another example. It will provide better
understanding of the opportunities for industries to diversify
and to convert from defense production while preserving
critical defense-related skills and to commercialize new
technology advances. We must, however, remain commit-
ted to the fundamental principle that a robust free market,
and not government intervention and regulation, is the key
to an effective defense industrial base.

15

Nonproliferation

In the post-Cold War era, one of our most threatening
national security challenges is the spread of weapons of
mass destruction and the means to deliver them. As the
threat of nuclear confrontation with the former Soviet

Union recedes, the danger that a nuclear, chemical, or bio-
logical weapon will be launched from some other quarter
by an aggressor is growing. Covert procurement networks
continue their energetic global efforts to acquire the means
to build these weapons. While the disintegration of the
Soviet bloc has led to relaxation of the forty-year-old East-
West controls of the allied Coordinating Committee for
Multilateral Export Controls (COCOM), dual-use technolo-
gies with military applications are becoming increasingly
available throughout world markets. inevitably, an increas-
ing number of supplier nations will become able to con-
tribute to the proliferation of ballistic missiles and weapons
of mass destruction.

U.S. nonproliferation policy is guided by four principles:

- Build on existing global norms against proliferation and,
where possible, strengthen and broaden them.

- Focus special efforts on those areas where the dangers
of proliferation remain acute, notably the Middle East,
Southwest Asia, South Asia, and the Korean Peninsula.

- Seek the broadest possible multilateral support, while
reserving the capability for unilateral action.

- Address the underlying security concerns that motivate
the acquisition of weapons of mass destruction, relying
on the entire range of political, diplomatic, economic,
intelligence, military, security assistance, and other
available tools.

These principles have been reflected in a number of
actions within the past year. At U.S. urging, multilateral
export control regimes — the Missile Technology Control
Regime (MTCR) and the Australia Group (which covers
chemical and biological technologies) — updated and
expanded their control lists. Completion of negotiations on
the Chemical Weapons Convention brought the world
nearer to a verifiable global ban on chemical weapons.
The 27 nations of the Nuclear Suppliers Group reconvened
for the first time in a dozen years and in 1992 reached

16

agreement to control 65 categories of dual-use equipment.
At U.S. initiative, COCOM created a Cooperative Forum to
enlist the cooperation of the newly independent states of
the former Soviet Union and other East European states in
controlling the export of sensitive technology. Japan and
the United States have agreed to strengthen their existing
understandings on supercomputer export controls. The
United Nations Special Commission and the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) have continued their efforts
to dismantle Saddam Hussein's nonconventional weapons
programs. North Korea at last accepted IAEA inspections
in accordance with it international obligations, although
full compliance is not yet assured.

In addition, the United States encouraged broader pa.rtici—
pation in nonproliferation regimes. The Non—Proliferation
Treaty (NPT) roster has grown to over 150 states including
China, France, and South Africa. The Treaty of Tlatelolco
may soon bring a nuclear weapon—free zone into force
throughout Latin America. The U.S. Enhanced Proliferation
Control Initiative has strengthened our own regulatory bar-
riers against missile, chemical, and biological weapons
technology proliferation, including proscriptions against
U.S. citizens contributing to proliferation. Through the
Middle East Arms Control Initiative, we will continue to
pursue the post-Gulf War opportunities for arms restraint.
Under the June 1992 nonproliferation initiative, we will
accelerate and intensify our nonproliferation efforts. In
addition, the United States will not produce plutonium or
highly-enriched uranium for nuclear explosive purposes —
a step intended to encourage countries in regions of ten-
sion such as the Middle East and South Asia to take similar
actions.

Though many of our efforts will continue through govern-
mental channels — including our Arms Control and
Disarmament Agency refocused to support nonproliferation
in addition to its tradition agenda — the private sector can
and must play an active role. The International Science
and Technology Center in Moscow and the Science
Technology Center in Kiev should provide promising civil-
ian opportunities for former weapon designers and engi-
neers. More creative approaches to this problem will be
required in the years ahead.

Arms Control

For most of the Cold War era, arms control efforts were
aimed primarily at dampening the effects of superpower
competition. Though noteworthy, the successes registered
were limited: for example, banning above-ground nuclear
tests; prohibiting biological weapons; placing ceilings on
permitted growth in strategic nuclear forces.

In the last few years, with the extraordinary changes in the
international security environment, that picture has
changed dramatically. Over a very short time, we have
achieved remarkable success in reducing nuclear and con-
ventional arsenals, in the effort to ban chemical weapons,
in establishing an extensive network of confidence-building
measures and communications facilities among former
adversaries.

Instead of merely dampening competition, arms control
now plays a major role in creating the framework for coop-
eration. In keeping with that change, the process of arms
control has also altered dramatically. In some areas, partic-
ularly with the independent states of the former Soviet
Union, we can now afford to take unilateral steps, often
based on anticipated reciprocity. In others, we continue to
require formal agreements, but those can be arrived at far
more quickly than before.

Before July 1991, the United States and the Soviet Union
had never agreed to reduce their strategic nuclear forces.
Now the combination of the July 1991 START Treaty, the
President's nuclear initiatives of September 1991 and
January 1992, and the June 1992 Bush-Yeltin agreement
on further strategic arms reductions will lower the number
of our strategic nuclear forces to less than one-third their
1990 level. Moreover, each side will eliminate all of it
multiple-warhead ICBMs, leaving strategic nuclear forces
that are true deterrent forces.

The 1990 Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe
(CFE) significantly reduces conventional military equipment
in Europe. CFE and the Helsinki Summit Agreement plac-
ing politically binding limits on military manpower in
Europe, establish comprehensive and stable levels of con-
ventional military forces on a continent that for centuries
was a major focus of conflict. The Open Skies Treaty will
help in this regard. We are also working closely with our
partners in the Conference on Security and Cooperation in
Europe (CSCE) to develop greater stability and openness in
military activities on the continent.

A major unfinished item on the arms control agenda, to
which the United States attaches the highest priority, is the
banning of chemical weapons. The best hope of achieving
the worldwide elimination of chemical weapons and of
stemming proliferation at the same time is to bring into
force the Chemical Weapons Convention. The United
States will be an original signatory to the Convention. To
spur others to commit themselves to the completion and
implementation of the Convention and to accelerate the
negotiations, the United States has formally forsworn the
use of chemical weapons for any purposes, including retal-
iation, against any state, effective when the Convention
enters into force. In addition, we are unconditionally com-
mitted to the complete destruction of all U.S. chemical
weapons stocks within ten years of its entry into force. We
did not wait for entry into force of the Convention and
have already begun the destruction ofour chemical
weapons. The United States has also concluded agree-
ments with Russia concerning the destruction of chemical
weapons, along with agreements on the safety, security,
and dismantlement of nuclear warheads, as part of our
overall efforts to aid the former Soviet Union in defense
conversion.

Ballistic-Missile Defenses

Ballistic-missile defense remains a critical element ofour
strategic posture, but given the current strategic conditions,
we have shifted ourfocus. The United States is now com-
mitted to the development of a system to provide Global
Protection Against Limited Strikes (GPALS). The receding
Soviet threat and the continued proliferation of ballistic-
missile capabilities encouraged us to redirect our SDI pro-
gram to meet an enduring requirement to protect our terri-
tory, our allies, and our forces abroad from accidental,
unauthorized or rogue-nation ballistic—missile attacks.

As the Patriot demonstrated during the Gulf War, ballistic
missile defenses are crucial to protect ourtroops and allies
against madmen or rogue nations. But we can and must
do better than Patriot to meet the growing threat from pro-
liferation. Ballistic-missile defenses will reinforce our other
security and regional policies and can be a force for stabili-
ty in troubled regions, removing the need for hair-trigger
responses to aggression, and possibly underwriting ballis-
tic—missile arms control measures.

17

At the June 1992 Summit, Presidents Bush and Yeltin
agreed to work together, with allies and other interested
states, in developing a concept for a Global Protection
System (GPS) against limited ballistic missile attack. Since
then, we have discussed GPS in detail with friends, NATO
allies, and with high-level representatives of Russia and
other former Soviet republics. We will continue our unilat-
eral, bilateral and multilateral efforts in an effort to develop
a mutually agreed GPS. This commitment to cooperation
on a Global Protection System is a landmark in U.S.-
Russian relations and will ensure that missile defenses can
be deployed in a stabilizing manner for the benefit of the
community of nations.

Intelligence

Our intelligence services continue to provide insights not
available from diplomatic exchanges or open sources —
insight that can give us a critical advantage in responding
to dangers or opportunities. Accurate and timely informa-
tion about conditions, motives, and actions of foreign pow-
ers is all the more essential in a radically changed world.
Clearly the main topics of interest have changed from a
few short years ago, but there is no diminution in the value
of accurate, timely information for policy formulation and
implementation.

Additionally, there is no lessening of the value of accurate,
timely information in support of military planning and
operations, particularly as U.S. force structure levels are
drawn down. We must know the basis for other nations’
policies and actions, their motives and their limits. U.S.
intelligence assets, technical and human, must remain
strong and responsive. They must remain flexible and
adaptable to changing policy objectives and priorities.

In recognition of a radically changed world, every effort is
being made to organize our intelligence institutions more
effectively and to enhance sharing and support between
their civil and military components. Intelligence priorities
have changed significantly. Some old intelligence target
such as state-sponsored terrorism remain, but new chal-
lenges — the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
narcotics trafficking and sanctions monitoring — demand
concentrated collection.

To the extent prudent, U.S. intelligence today is also being

used in dramatically new ways, such as assisting interna-
tional organizations like the United Nations when called

18

upon in support of crucial peacekeeping, humanitarian
assistance and arms control efforts. We will share informa-
tion and assets that strengthen peaceful relationships and
aid in building confidence. Finally, despite significant and
unprecedented progress in our intelligence exchange with
friendly and formerly hostile governments abroad, the hos-
tile intelligence threat still exists and continued priority
attention must be given to counterintelligence.

Terrorism

Despite having secured the release of all American
hostages in Lebanon and a welcome decline in majorter-
rorist events, terrorism remains a potential threat to our
national security — a threat we will oppose by all legal
means available. To accede to terrorist demands only
places more American citizens at risk. But terrorism is not
merely the seizing of hostages. We will pay no ransoms
nor agree to other conditions that could serve to encourage
additional terrorism. This no-concessions policy is the
most effective way of protecting the greatest number of
people and ensuring their safety. At the same time, every
available resource will be used to gain the safe return of
American citizens who are ta ken hostage by terrorist.
Enhanced security and counterterrorism measures have
helped thwart other terrorist act such as arson, bombings,
and armed assault.

States that practice or actively support terrorism will suffer
international isolation and economic repercussions. The
United States will reserve the right to act unilaterally, and
will continue to work cooperatively with other nations to
prevent and respond to terrorist acts. The number of
nations with which we have assurances of cooperation
continues to grow.

Combatting Illegal Drugs

The flow of illicit narcotics into the United States under-
mines our national security in many ways. It harms our
society and degrades our economy, our competitiveness,
and our international leadership as a champion of the rule
of law. Progress has been made in terms of record
seizures, substantial disruption of trafficking routes,
improved international cooperation and the passage of leg-
islation to help stimulate legitimate economic activity as an
alternative to the drug trade. But more is required.

To choke off supply, our principal strategic goal is to iden-
tify, disrupt, dismantle, and ultimately destroy theAraffick-
ing organizations that produce or smuggle illicit drugs for
the U.S. market. The U.S. will continue to mobilize the
international community to combat drug trafficking through
multilateral conventions, bilateral task forces, domestic and
international legal reforms, information programs, and
when needed, new institutions. We have also focused on
strengthening enforcement and interdiction efforts in specif-
ic regions. For example, our Andean, Caribbean, Central
American and Mexican initiatives and programs in other
regions are aimed at potential sources and transit countries.

On the demand side, our National Drug Control Strategy
unites the entire Federal effort and joins state, local and pri-
vate sector effort into a more effective national partner-
ship. We are now committing unprecedented resources for
education, prevention, treatment, and law enforcement.
Yet, no matter how much money the government commits,
no matter how widespread the implementation programs,
government alone cannot solve the problem of illicit drugs.
We will do all we can, but in the end, it is our families,
neighborhoods, and communities that must nurture critical
values like self-discipline, personal responsibility, and ser-
vice to others.

How We Can Inﬂuence The
Future

As we Iooktoward the future in the defense arena, we see
an agenda of new issues and opportunities.

- The restructuring and reshaping of the entire

Department of Defense must continue, along with the
development of new strategies and doctrines. In addi-
tion, we must continue to exploit technological opportu-
nities, taking full advantage of the military-technical rev-
olution in weapons, electronics, and organization. We
need advanced sensor and other surveillance and recon-
naissance systems, communications, as well as precision
lethal and non-lethal weapons, and we need to integrate
them more effectively. In peacetime, they will be a
deterrent. In wartime, they will be essential to survival
and success on the battlefield. We need to continue to
restructure our defense technology and industrial base to
shift resources to long—term military potential and recon-
stitution, recognizing the need to field modernized
equipment and to develop operational concepts to
employ new technology effectively.

- The United States should significantly increase its
efforts to improve regional and United Nations conflict
prevention efforts, humanitarian assistance, and peace-
keeping capabilities. This would contribute to the early
attenuation of conflict, rather than allowing it to expand
into a serious national threat. Together with our allies
and friends, the United States must develop multination-
al capabilities necessary for enforcing peace, and
enhance our capability to contribute to monitoring, veri-
fication and reconnaissance, as well as peace rebuilding
after conflict. These will demand innovative thinking
and creative leadership.

- The United States must continue to play an active role
in the evolution of the European security architecture,
seeking to maintain peace and security at the lowest
necessary level of forces. We must work to strengthen
the viability of NATO, and actively participate in the
development of a credible peacekeeping capability. We
must actively seek the contributions of the members of
the North Atlantic Cooperation Council in these endeav-
ors, and assist them in their transition to democratic sys-
tems.

- In Asia, we should strengthen the U.S.-Japan relation-
ship which remains key to regional stability. We must
nurture existing defense relationships, work to expand
access to facilities throughout the region, and encourage
security dialogue and cooperation. We will support
regional stability by maintaining military forces in the
region and through such fora as the ASEAN post-minis-
terial conference; encourage appropriate confidence
building measures; support North and South Korean
bilateral treaties and normalization of relations; continue
to advocate positive change in China; and, consistent
with ourtop priority of the fullest possible accounting
for our POWs and MIAs, improved relations with
Vietnam.

- In the former Soviet Union, we will continue to encour-
age and support positive, centralized control of nuclear
weapons, press for rapid arms control treaty implemen-
tation and help reduce their nuclear arsenals. We will
continue to press for a full accounting of former Soviet
biological warfare programs. We seekto establish new
relationships with Ukraine, Belarus and Kazakhstan, all
of which have agreed to adhere to the NPT as non-
nuclear states. We will help promote effective civilian
control over the military, and assist the militaw forces of
the former Soviet republics in assuming their legitimate
role in civil society.

19

20

In the Middle East and South Asia, we will maintain
forces deployed in the region, expand our bilateral
defense arrangement, preposition materiel and equip-
ment, and conductjoint and combined exercises to
defend the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of our partners in the region. We will continue
to work to assure access to oil, deter recourse to war,
terrorism and subversion, and enforce U.N. Security
Council resolutions.

In Latin America, we will advocate multinational
responses to aggression, seekto strengthen civilian
authority over the militaw, encourage wider participa-
tion in U.N. peacekeeping operations, promote regional
efforts to implement the arms control agenda adopted
by the OAS, and continue to undertake major counter-
drug, counter-terrorism and nation assistance missions
in the region.

In Africa, we will continue to participate in United
Nations peacekeeping and humanitarian assistance
operations. We will promote the peaceful settlement of
disputes and the rule of law, support friends and allies to
improve their self-defense capabilities in order to deter
and defend against regional aggressors, and continue to
maintain and improve our crisis response capabilities.

- The United States will continue its worldwide efforts to
constrain the proliferation of weapons of mass destruc-
tion. To reduce the danger of the spread of militarily-
useful technologies, weapons of mass destruction, and
the missiles to deliver them from the former Soviet
Union, the United States is working closely with the
new independent states. We will continue to assist their
authorities to implement all relevant international agree-
ments, and help develop effective internal accounting of
dangerous materials and equipment and methods for
protecting them from theft or diversion. The United
States will also help establish and implement effective
export controls, and assist in the safe and secure dis-
mantling of their nuclear warheads. We will also help
create opportunities for weapons scientists and engi-
neers to redirect their talents to peaceful endeavors.

- Finally, it is time to refashion our security assistance
budget, and review how we fund peacekeeping and
explore adequate American financial support for U.N.
peacekeeping and humanitarian activities. We need to
increase funding for military and defense contact pro-
grams and other activities designed to facilitate the suc-
cessful transition of foreign militaries to democratic sys-
tems, as well as ensuring their ability to defend them-
selves against aggression.

VI. The World As It Can Be...
If We Lead ADC. Attempt To Shape
It As Only America Can

As we approach the 21st Century, the fundamental values
that have guided this Nation for over two centuries have
not changed. Our basic national interest and objectives
and the requirement for American leadership are still the
same. But our strategy has changed to position us better to
lead in a world which has changed as well.

While we no longer confront a single, defining threat, the
challenges that face America today, and that will confront
us in the future, are more complex than ever before. But
just as these challenges are broad, so too are the opportuni-
ties for America. No other nation has the same combina-
tion of moral, cultural, political, economic, and military
credibility. No other has won such confidence, respect,
and trust. No other has the same potential and indeed
responsibility for world leadership.

America has always stood for much more than the sum of
its economic want and needs. We do care about the
world around us; each successive generation of Americans
has written it own chapter of contributions to the annals of
history. We have inspired many because of what we have
achieved and because of what we represent. We live in a

country resplendent in freedom, where people of all reli-
gions, races, creeds, and colors can hope to live in peace
and harmony; where success and achievement are deter-
mined by one's initiative, ingenuity, and imagination;
where there is an unbounded belief in human dignity and
faith in human potential; where there is always hope for a
better tomorrow. We must continue to share our hopes
and dreams with the world.

We have a vision for the future. We seek a world of coop-
eration and progress, not confrontation; a world no longer
divided, but a community of independent and interdepen-
dent nations joined together by shared values; a world in
which the United States role is defined by what we stand
for — freedom, human rights, economic prosperity, the
rule of law, peace — ratherthan what we stand against.
To succeed, our strategy will have to be more than words
on a piece of paper. It will take faith, courage, hard work,
and inspiration. It will also take dialogue and debate, for
that too is what democracy is 'all about. It will take the
very best we have to offer— as individuals, as institutions,
as a Nation. Let us work together to lead the world toward
the 21st Century, the Age of Democratic Peace. There is
no more important goal to which we could aspire.

21

