 N A 1 IL) ¢§.i[_;3\_L4
T*tfLUR|TY%L

* STI§ATECY.
OF “
%|::\%‘GA(_1EM1:TL\%l;
\.\IDv..:‘ J
lA&% V 

JULY 1.994

__  ‘ E*§.-‘3)~"=’1"zaL-l:.Ii.,-f=
-"““3“!¢‘-'E“‘i‘\ ~’§»':‘\ Ii-J‘  lfivl
4% * -

- U/y«UL1do9“‘I’”=' PM/Ihdmtoq
If

A NATIONAL
SECURITY
STRATEGY

OF  
ENGAGEMENT

AND   A
EN LARGEMENT

 

WHITE HOUSE
1994

 

Contents

Preface i

Introduction  1

. Advancing Our Interests Through
Engagement and Enlargement  5

Enhancing Our Security  6

Maintaining a Strong Defense Capability 

Major Regional Contingencies  7
Overseas Presence  7

Counterterrorism, Fighting Drug
Trafficking and Other Missions  8

Combatting Terrorism  8
Fighting Drug Trafﬁcking ...9
Other Missions  9

Deciding When and How to Employ
US. Forces  10

Combatting the Spread and Use of
Weapons of Mass Destruction
and Missiles 11

Nonproliferation and
Counterproliferation  11

Strategic Nuclear Forces  1 1
Arms Control  12
Peace Operations  13
Strong Intelligence Capabilities  14

The Environment  15

Promoting Prosperity at Home  15
Enhancing American Competitiveness  15
Partnership with Business and Labor  15
Enhancing Access to Foreign Markets  16

The North American Free Trade
Agreement  16

6 Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation  16
Uruguay Round of GATT  16
U.S. —Japan Framework Agreement  16
Expanding the Realm of Free Trade  17

Strengthening Macroeconomic
Coordination  17

Providing for Energy Security  17

Promoting Sustainable Development
Abroad  17

Promoting Democracy  18

Ill. Integrated Regional Approaches  21
Europe and Eurasia  21
East Asian and the Pacific  23
The Western Hemisphere  24

The Middle East, Southwest and
South Asia  25 E

Africa  26

IV. Conclusions 29

Preface if S 

Protecting our nation's security — our people, our territory
and our way of life — is my Administration's foremost
mission and constitutional duty. The end of the Cold War
fundamentally changed America's security imperatives.
The central security challenge of the past half century —
the threat of communist expansion — is gone. The dangers
we face today are more diverse. Ethnic conflict is
spreading and rogue states pose a serious danger to
regional stability in many corners of the globe. The prolif-
eration of weapons of mass destruction represents a major
challenge to our security. Large scale environmental degra-
dation, exacerbated by rapid population growth, threatens
to undermine political stability in many countries and
regions.

At the same time, we have unparalleled opportunities to
make our nation safer and more prosperous. Our military
might is unparalleled. We now have a truly global
economy linked by an instantaneous communications
network, which offers growing scope for American jobs
and American investment. The community of democratic
nations is growing, enhancing the prospects for political
stability, peaceful conflict resolution and greater dignity
and hope for the people of the world. The international
community is beginning to act together to address pressing
global environmental needs.

Never has American leadership been more essential — to
navigate the shoals of the world's new dangers and to
capitalize on its opportunities. American assets are unique:
our military strength, our dynamic economy, our powerful
ideals and, above all, our people. We can and must make
the difference through our engagement; but our involve-

ment must be carefully tailored to serve our interests and
priorities.

This report, submitted in accordance with Section 603 of
the Goldwater-Nichols Defense Department
Reorganization Act of 1986, elaborates a new national
security strategy for dtis new era. Focussing on new threats
and new opportunities, its central goals are:

0 To credibly sustain our security with military forces
that are ready to ﬁght.

0 To bolster America's economic revitalization.
- To promote democracy abroad.

Over the past seventeen months, my Administration has
worked to pursue these goals. This national security
strategy report presents the strategy that has guided this
effort. It is premised on a belief that the line between

our domestic and foreign policies has increasingly disap-
peared — that we must revitalize our economy if we are
to sustain our military forces, foreign initiatives and global
inﬂuence, and that we must engage actively abroad if we
are to open foreign markets and create jobs for our people.

We believe that our goals of enhancing our security,
bolstering our economic prosperity, and promoting
democracy are mutually supportive. Secure nations are
more likely to support free trade and maintain democratic
structures. Nations with growing economies and strong
trade ties are more likely to feel secure and to work toward
freedom. And democratic states are less likely to threaten

our interess and more likely to cooperate with the U.S. to
meet security threats and promote sustainable development.

Since my Administration began, we have taken actions to
meet these goals. To enhance global security, for example,
we have pursued peaoe initiatives in the Middle East,
established NATO's Partnership for Peace, reached a
denuclearization agreement with Ukraine and Russia and
implemented a ﬁrm strategy for a non-nuclear Korean
peninsula.TO bolster prosperity at home and around the
world, we have passed the North American Free Trade
Agreement, worked to open Asian-Pacific markets through
the first-ever summit meeting of the Organization for Asian
Paciﬁc Economic Cooperation, lowered export controls
and — having successfully completed the seventh GATT
round — will now work with Congress to pass it this year.
Our actions to promote democracy include our support for
South Africa's recent transformation, aid to a new democ-
ratic Russia and Central and Eastern European nations, and
our work with our Western Hemisphere neighbors, which
will culminate at Decembers Summit of the Americas.

Even with the Cold War over, our nation must maintain
military forces that are sufficient to deter diverse threats
and, when necessary, to fight and win against our adver-
saries. While many factors ultimately contribute to our
nation's safety and well-being, no single component is
more important than the men and women who wear
America’s uniform and stand sentry over our security.
Their skill, service and dedication constitute the core of
our defenses. Today our military is the best-equipped, best-
trained and best-prepared fighting force in the world, and I
am committed to ensure that it remains so.

Our national security strategy reflects both America's inter-
ests and our values. Our commitment to freedom, equality
and human dignity continues to serve as a beacon of hope
to peoples around the world. The vitality, creativity and
diversity of American society are important sources of
national strength in a global economy that is dynamic,

multi-cultural and increasingly driven by ideas and
information.

Our prospects in this new era are promising. The specter
of nuclear annihilation has dramatically receded. The
historic events of the past year — including the handshake
between Israel and the PLO and the breakthroughs by
Nelson Mandela and F.W. DeKlerk that culminated in the
election of a multi-racial parliament and a government
headed by President Mandela — suggest this era's
possibilities for progress toward security, prosperity and
democracy.

Our nation can only address this era's dangers and oppor-
tunities if we remain actively engaged in global affairs. We
are the world's greatest power, and we have global inter-
ests as well as responsibilities. As our nation learned after
World War I, we can ﬁnd no security for America in isola-
tionism, nor prosperity in protectionism. For the American
people to be safer and enjoy expanding opportunities, our
nation must work to deter would-be aggressors, open
foreign markets, promote the spread of democracy abroad,
encourage sustainable development and pursue new
opportunities for peace. ‘

Our national security requires the patient application of
American will and resources. We can only sustain that
necessary investment with the broad, bi-partisan support of
the American people and their representatives in Congress.
The full participation of Congress is essential to the success
of our new engagement, and I will consult with Congress
at every step of the policy making and implementation
process. The Cold War may be over, but the need for
American leadership abroad remains as strong as ever. I
am committed to building a new public consensus to
sustain our active engagement abroad. This document is a
part of that commitment.

hm“ ‘..-.._ ..-..'...._._.._ ,_,. .

I. Introduction

A new era is upon us. The Cold War is over. The dissolu-
tion of the Soviet empire has radically transformed the
security environment facing the United States and our
allies. The primary security imperative of the past half
century — containing communist expansion while -
preventing nuclear war —— is gone. We no longer face
massive Soviet forces across an East-West divide nor Soviet

missiles targeted on the United States and ready to fire. Yet '

there remains a complex array of new and old security
challenges America must meet as we approach a new
century.

This national security strategy assesses America's role in
this new international context and describes the
Administration's strategy to advance our interests at home
and abroad.

This is a period of great promise but also great uncertainty.
We stand as the world’s preeminent power. America’s
core value of freedom, as embodied in democratic gover-
nance and market economics, has gained ground around
the world. Hundreds of millions of people have thrown off
communism, dictatorship or apartheid. Former adversaries
now cooperate with us in diplomacy and global problem
solving. The threat of a war among great powers and the
specter of nuclear annihilation both have receded dramati-
cally. The dynamism of the global economy is trans-
forming commerce, culture and global politics, promising
greater prosperity for America and greater cooperation
among nations.

At the same time, troubling uncertainties and clear threats
remain. The new, independent states that replaced the

Soviet Union are experiencing wrenching economic and
political transitions, as are many new democracies of
Central and Eastern Europe. While our rel_ations with the
other great powers are as constructive as at any point in
this century, Russia's future is uncertain, and China main-
tains a repressive regime even as that country assumes a
more important economic and political role in global
affairs. The spread of weapons of mass destruction poses
serious threats. Violent extremists threaten fragile peace
processes, from the Mideast to South Africa. Worldwide,
there is a resurgence of militant nationalism as well as
ethnic and religious conflict. This has been demonstrated
by upheavals in Bosnia, Rwanda and Somalia, where the
United States has participated in peacekeeping and
humanitarian missions.

Not all security risks are military in nature. Transnational
phenomena such as terrorism, narcotics trafficking, envi-
ronmental degradation, rapid population growth and
refugee flows also have security implications for both
present and long term American policy. In addition, an
emerging class of transnational environmental issue_s are
increasingly affecting international stability and conse-
quently will present new challenges to U.S. strategy.

American leadership in the world has never been more
important. If we exert our leadership abroad, we can make
America safer and more prosperous -— by deterring aggres-
sion, by fostering the peaceful resolution of dangerous
conflicts, by opening foreign markets, by helping democ-
ratic regimes and by tackling global problems. Without our
active leadership and engagement abroad, threats will
fester and our opportunities will narrow.

We can only engage actively abroad if the American
people and the Congress are willing to bear the costs of
that leadership —-— in dollars, political energy and, at times,
American lives. In a democracy, the foreign policy of the
nation must serve the needs of the people. The preamble
of the Constitution sets out the basic objectives:

to provide for the common defense, promote
the general welfare, and secure the blessings of
liberty to ourselves and our posterity.

The end of the Cold War does not alter these fundamental
purposes. Nor does it reduce the need for active American
efforts, here and abroad, to pursue those goals. One
purpose of this report is to help foster the broad, bi-
partisan understanding and support necessary to sustain
our international engagement. Congressional participation
is critical to this commitment.

Our national security strategy is based onlenlarging the
community of market democracies while deterring and
containing a range of threats to our nation, our allies and
our interests. The more that democracy and political and
economic liberalization take hold in the world, particularly
in countries of geostrategic importance to us, the safer our
nation is likely to be and the more our people

are likely to prosper.

To that broad end, the report explains the three central
components of our strategy of engagement and enlarge-
ment: our efforts to enhance our security by maintaining a
strong defense capability and promoting cooperative secu-
rity measures; our work to open foreign markets and spur
global economic growth; and our promotion of democracy
abroad. it also explains how we are pursuing the three
elements of our strategy in speciﬁc regions.

During this Administration's first seventeen months, this
strategy already has begun to produce tangible results with
respect to our security requirements:

U At the President's direction, the Pentagon completed
the Bottom Up Review, a full-scale assessment of
what defense forces and systems our nation needs for
this new security era. The President has also set forth
a ﬁve-year defense budget that funds the force struc-
ture recommended by the Review, and he repeatedly
stressed that he will draw the line against further cuts
that would undermine that force structure or erode
U.S. military readiness.

0 The President convened a NATO Summit in January
1994. The Summit approved the Partnership For
Peace and other major new initiatives, to ensure that
NATO is prepared to meet the European and trans-
Atlantic security challenges of this era, and to
provide the security relationships that will bind
former communist states to the rest of Europe. Since
then, 21 countries, including Russia, have joined the '
Partnership for Peace.

0 The President launched a comprehensive policy to
combat the proliferation of weapons of mass destruc-
tion and the missiles that deliver them. The U.S.
opened formal negotiations on a Comprehensive
Test Ban Treaty and secured landmark commitments
to eliminate all nuclear weapons in Ukraine, Belarus
and Kazakhstan.

0 On May 3, 1994, President Clinton signed a
Presidential Decision Directive establishing “U.S.
Policy on Reforming Multilateral Peace Operations.”
This policy represents the first, comprehensive frame-
work for U.S. decision-making on issues of peace-
keeping and peace enforcement suited to the realities
of the post Cold War period.

On the economic front, Administration policies have
reaped dramatic successes:

- The President worked with the Congress on effective
measures to reduce the federal budget deﬁcit and
restore economic growth. These measures help
increase our competitiveness and strengthen our
position in negotiations with other nations.

- The President secured approval of the North
American Free Trade Agreement which creates the
world's largest free trade zone and will create
hundreds of thousands of American jobs. The vote
for NAFTA marked a decisive U.S. affirmation of its
international engagement. Through its environmental
and labor side agreements, we are working actively
to protect the rights of workers and to reduce air and
water pollution that crosses national boundaries.

- The Administration stood at the forefront of a multi-
lateral effort to achieve history's most extensive
market-opening agreements in the GATT Uruguay-
round negotiations on world trade. The President is



3?

 

\

committed to workin_g with Congress to secure U.S.
accession this year to this pathbreaking agreement
and the resulting World Trade Organization.

The President convened the first meeting of leaders
of the Organization for Asian Pacific Economic
Cooperation (APEC) — and took steps to expand our
ties with the economies of the Asia-Pacific region,
the fastest growing area in the worid..

We have committed the United States to reduce its
greenhouse gas emissions to 1990 levels by the year
2000, and we have developed a National Climate
Plan to achieve that goal. The United States has also
taken a leading role at the international level towards
phasing out the production of most ozone-depleting
substances. Under the Montreal Protocol for the
protection of the ozone layer, the U.S. is contributing
to developing countries’ efforts to reduce their emis-
sions of ozone-depleting chemicals. In June 1993,
the U.S. signed the Biodiversity Treaty.

The Administration has asserted world leadership on
population issues, focussing in the context of the
upcoming Conference on Population and
Development on 3 plan to promote family planning,
primary health and related development strategies
that allow families to choose the number and
spacing of their children.

- The United States launched a series of initiatives to
bolster the new democracies of Central and Eastern
Europe. We affirmed our concern for their security,
recognizing that such assurances would play a key
role in promoting democratic developments.

0 The U.S., working with the Organization of
American States, helped reverse an anti-democratic
coup in Guatemala.

- The Administration led efforts to strengthen UN sanc-
tions on the military rulers of Haiti towards the end
of restoring democracy and Haiti's democratically-
elected president.

- The President invited the democratic nations of the
Hemisphere to an unprecedented summit to discuss
cooperation in support of democracy in the hemi-
sphere, as well as mutual prosperity and sustainable
development.

0 The U.S. has increased support for South Africa as it
conducted elections and became a multiracial
democracy.

0 The Administration initiated policies aimed at crisis
prevention, including a new peacekeeping policy
and a proposed revision of the Foreign Assistance
Act.

This report has two major sections. The first part of the
report explains our strategy of engagement and enlarge-
ment. The second part describes briefly how the
Administration is applying this strategy to the world's
major regions.

Finally, the President has demonstrated a firm commitment
to expanding the global realm of democracy:

- The Administration substantialiy expanded U.S.
support for democratic and market reform in Russia
and the other newly independent states of the former
Soviet Union.

ll. Advancing our Interests Through
  Engagement and Enlargement

The dawn of the post-Cold War era presents the United
States with many distinct dangers, but also with a generally
improved security environment-and a range of opportuni-
ties to improve it further. The unitary threat that dominated
our engagement during the Cold War has been replaced
by a complex set of challenges, and our nation’s strategy
for defining and addressing those challenges is still
evolving. In this time of global change, it is clear we
cannot police the world; but it is equally clear we must
exercise global leadership. As the world's premier
economic and military power, and its premier practitioner
of democratic values, the U.S. is indispensable to the
forging of stable political relations and open trade.

Our leadership must stress preventive diplomacy —
through such means as support for democracy, economic
assistance, overseas military presence, military-to-military
contacts and involvement in multilateral negotiations in
the Middle East and elsewhere — in order to help resolve
problems, reduce tensions and defuse conflicts before they
become crises. These measures are a wise investment in
our national security because they offer the prospect of
resolving problems with the least human and material cost.

Our engagement must be selective, focussing on the chal-
lenges that are most relevant to our own interests and
focussing our resources where we can make the most
difference. We must aiso use the right tools — being
willing to act unilaterally when our direct national interests
are most at stake; in alliance and partnership when our
interests are shared by others; and multilaterally when our
interests are more general and the problems are best
addressed by the international community. In all-cases, the
nature of our response must depend on what best serves
ourown long-term national interests. Those interests are

ultimately defined by our security requirements. Such
requirements start with our physical defense and economic
well-being. They also include environmental security as
well as the security of values achieved through expansion
of the community of democratic nations.

Our national security strategy draws upon a range of polit-
ical, military and economic instruments, and focuses on
the primary objectives that President Clinton has stressed
throughout his campaign and his Administration:

0 Enhancing Our Security. Taking account of the reali-
ties of the post-Cold War era and the new threats, a
military capability appropriately sized and postured
to meet the diverse needs of our strategy, including
the ability, in concert with regional allies, to win two
nearly simultaneous major regional conflicts. We
will continue to pursue arms control agreements to
reduce the danger of nuclear conﬂict and promote
stability.

0 Promoting Prosperity at Home. A vigorous and inte-
grated economic policy designed to stimulate global
environmentally sound economic growth and free
trade and to press for open and equal U.S. access to
foreign markets.

0 Promoting Democracy. A framework of democratic
enlargement that increases our security by
protecting, consolidating and enlarging the commu-
nity of free market democracies. Our efforts focus on
preserving democratic processes in key emerging
democratic states including Russia, Ukraine and
other new states of the former Soviet Union.

 

These basic objectives of our national security strategy will
guide the allocation of our scarce national security
resources. Because deficit reduction is also central to the
long-term health and competitiveness of the American
economy, we are striving for the most efficient and envi-
ronmentally sound use of our resources. We have already
begun the difficult process of making these adjustments by
undertaking a fundamental review of our national defense
requirements and of the means for promoting democracy.
We have also submitted to the Congress major reform
legislation to update and streamline our international
programs.

Enhancing our Security

The U.S. government is responsible for protecting the lives
and personal safety of Americans, maintaining our political
freedom and independence as a nation and providing for
the well-being and prosperity of our nation. No matter
how powerful we are as a nation, we cannot secure these
basic goals unilaterally, Whether the problem is nuclear
proliferation, regional instability, the reversal of reform in
the former Soviet empire, or unfair trade practices, the
threats and challenges we face demand cooperative, multi-
national solutions. Therefore, the only responsible U.S.
strategy is one that seeks to ensure U.S. inﬂuence over and
participation in collective decisionmaking in'a wide and
growing range of circumstances.

An important element of our security preparedness

depends on durable relationships with allies and other
friendly nations. Accordingly, a central thrust of our
strategy of engagement is to sustain and adapt the security
relationships we have with key nations around the world.
These ties constitute an important part of an international
framework that will be essentiai to ensuring cooperation
across a broad range of issues. Within the realm of security
issues, our cooperation with allies includes such activities
as: conducting combined training and exercises, Coordi-
nating military plans and preparations, sharing intelli-
gence, jointly developing new systems, and controlling
exports of sensitive technologies according to common
standards. '

The post-Cold War era presents a different set of threats to
our security. In this new period, enhancing American
security requires, ﬁrst and foremost, developing and main-

taining a strong defense capability of forces ready to fight.
We are developing integrated approaches for dealing with
threats arising from the development of nuclear and other
weapons of mass destruction by other nations. Our secu-
rity requires a vigorous arms control effort and a strong
intelligence capability. We have implemented a strategy
for multilateral peace operations. We need to rigorously
apply clear guidelines for when to use military force in this
era.

We also face security risks that are not military in nature.
Transnational phenomena such as terrorism, narcotics traf-
ficking, and refugee flows also have security implications
both for present and long term American policy. An
emerging class of transnational environmental issues are
increasingly affecting international stability and conse-
quently will present new challenges to U.S. strategy.

Maintaining a Strong Defense Capability

U.S. military capabilities are critical to the success of our
strategy. This nation has unparalleled military capabilities:
the United States is the only nation capable of conducting
large-scale and effective military operations far beyond its
borders. This fact, coupled with our unique position as the
security partner of choice in many regions, provides a
foundation for regional stability through mutual iy beneﬁ-
cial security partnerships. Our willingness and ability to
play a leading role in defending common interests also
help ensure that the United States will remain an influen-
tial voice in international affairs — political, military and
economic — that affect our well-being, so long as we
retain the military wherewithal to underwrite our commit-
ments credibly. '

To protect and advance U.S. interests in the face of the
dangers and opportunities outlined, earlier, the United
States must deploy robust and flexible military forces that
can accomplish a variety of tasks:

- Dealing with Major Regional Contingencies. Our
forces must be able to help offset the military power
of regional states with interests opposed to those of
the United States and its allies. To do this, we must
be able to credibly deter and defeat aggression, by
projecting and sustaining U.S. power in more than
one region if necessary.

0 Providing a Credible Overseas Presence. U.S. forces
must also be forward deployed or stationed in key
overseas regions in peacetime to deter aggression.
Such overseas presence demonstrates our commit-
ment to allies and friends, undervvrites regional
stability, gains us familiarity with overseas operating
environments, promotes combined training among
the forces of friendly countries, and provides timely
initial response capabilities.

- Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction. We are
devoting greater efforts to stemming the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and their delivery
means, but at the same time we must improve our
capabilities to deter and prevent the use of such
weapons and protect ourselves against their effects.
(Our integrated program to deal with threats to our
security from weapons of mass destruction is
discussed below.)

I Contributing to Multilateral Peace Operations.
When our interests call for it, the United States must
also be prepared to participate in multilateral efforts
to broker settlements of internal conflicts and bolster
new democratic governments. Thus, our forces must
prepare to participate in peacekeeping, peace
enforcement and other operations in support of these
objectives. (Our strategy for peace operations and
the contribution of U.S. forces is discussed below.)

0 Supporting Counterterrorism Efforts and Other
National Security Objectives. A number of other
tasks remain that U.S. forces have typically carried
out with both general purpose and specialized units.
These missions include: counterterrorism and puni-
tive attacks, noncombatant evacuation, counter-
narcotics operations, nation assistance, and humani-
tarian and disaster relief operations.

To meet all of these requirements successfully, our forces
must be capable of responding quickly and operating
effectively. That is, they must be ready to fight and win.
This imperative demands highly qualified and motivated
people; modern, well-maintained equipment; realistic
training; strategic mobility; and sufficient support and
sustainment capabilities.

Major Regional Contingencies

The focus of our planning for major theater conflict is on
deterring and, if necessary, fighting and defeating aggres-
sion by potentially hostile regional powers, such as North
Korea, Iran or Iraq. Such states are capable of fielding
sizable military forces that can cause serious imbalances in
military power within regions important to the United
States, with allied or friendly states often finding it difficult
to match the power of a potentially aggressive neighbor.
To deter aggression, prevent coercion of allied or friendly
governments and, ultimately, defeat aggression should it
occur, we must prepare our forces to confront this scale of
threat, preferably in concert with our allies and friends, but
unilaterally if necessary. To do this, we must have forces
that can deploy quickly and supplement U.S. fonvard
based and forward deployed forces, along with regional
allies, in halting an invasion and defeating the aggressor.

With programmed enhancements, the forces the
Administration is fielding will be sufficient to heip defeat
aggression in two nearly simultaneous major regionai
conflicts. As a nation with global interests, it is important
that the United States maintain forces with aggregate capa-
biiitieson this scale. Obviously, we seek to avoid a situa-
tion in which an aggressor in one region might be tempted
to take advantage when U.S. forces are heavily committed
elsewhere. More basically, maintaining a "two war" force
helps ensure that the United States will have sufficient mili-
tary capabilities to deter or defeat aggression by a coalition
of hostile powers or by a larger, more capable adversary
than we foresee today.

We will never know with certainty how an enemy might
fight or precisely what demands might be placed on our
own forces in the future. The contributions of allies or
coalition partners will vary from place to place and over
time. Thus, balanced U.S. forces are needed in order to
provide a wide range of complementary capabilities and to
cope with the unpredictable and unexpected.

Overseas Presence

The need to deploy U.S. military forces abroad in peace-
time is also an important factor in determining our overall
force structure. We will maintain robust overseas presence
in several forms, such as permanently stationed forces,

 

deployments and combined exercises, port calls and other
force visits, as well as military-to-military contacts. These
activities provide several benefits. Speciﬁcally they:

- Give form and substance to our bilateral and multi-
lateral security commitments.

0 Demonstrate our determination to defend U.S. and
allied interests in critical regions, deterring hostile
nations from acting contrary to those interests.

- Provide forward elements for rapid response in crises
as well as the bases, ports and other infrastructure
essential for deployment of U.S.-based forces by air,
sea and land.

- Enhance the effectiveness of coalition operations,
including peace operations, by improving our ability
to operate with other nations.

- Allow the United States to use its position of trust to
prevent the development of power vacuums and
dangerous arms races, thereby underwriting regional
stability by precluding threats to regional security.

0 Facilitate regional integration, since nations that may
not be willing to work together in our absence may
be willing to coalesce around us in a crisis. ‘

- Promote an international security environment of
trust, cooperation, peace and stability, which is
fundamental to the vitality of developing democra-
cies and free market economies for America's own
economic well-being and security.

Through training programs, combined exercises, military
contacts, interoperability and shared defense with potential
coalition partners, as well as security assistance programs
that include judicious foreign military sales, we can
strengthen the local self-defense capabilities of our friends
and allies. Through active participation in regional security
dialogues, we can reduce regional tensions, increase trans-
parency in armaments and improve our bilateral and
multilateral cooperation.

By improving the defense capabilities of our friends and
demonstrating our commitment to defend common inter-
ests, these activities enhance deterrence, encourage
responsibility-sharing on the part of friends and allies,
decrease the likelihood that U.S. forces will be necessary if

conflict arises and raise the odds that U.S. forces will find a
relatively favorable situation should a U.S. response be
required.

Counterterrorism, Fighting Drug Trafficking
and Other Missions

While the missions outlined above will remain the primary
determinants of our general purpose and nuclear force
structure, U.S. military forces and assets will also be called
upon to perform a wide range of other important missions
as well. Some of these can be accomplished by conven-
tional forces fielded primarily for theater operations. Often,
however, these missions call for specialized units and
capabilities.

Combating Terrorism

As long as terrorist groups continue to target American citi-

zens and interests, the United States will need to have

specialized units available to defeat such groups. From
time to time, we might also find it necessary to strike
terrorists at their bases abroad or to attack assets valued by
the governments that support them.

Our policy in countering international terrorists is to make
no concessions to terrorists, continue to pressure state
sponsors of terrorism, fully exploit all available legal mech-
anisms to punish international terrorists and help other
govemments improve their capabilities to combat
terrorism. .

Countering terrorism effectively requires close day-to-day
coordination among Executive Branch agencies. The
Departments of State, Justice and Defense, the FBI and CIA
continue to cooperate closely in an ongoing effort against
international terrorists. Positive results will come from inte-
gration of intelligence, diplomatic and rule-of-law activi-
ties, and through close cooperation with other govern-
ments and international counterterrorist organizations.

Improving U.S. intelligence capacities is a significant part
of the U.S. response. Terrorists, whether from well-orga-
nized groups or the kind of more loosely organized group
responsible for the World Trade Center bombing, have the

' advantage of being able to take the initiative in the timing

and choice of targets. Terrorism involving weapons of
mass destruction represents a particularly dangerous
potential threat that must be countered.

The United States has made concerted efforts this past year
to punish and deter terrorists. On June 26, 1993, following
a determination that Iraq had plotted an assassination
attempt against former President Bush, President Clinton
ordered a cruise missile attack against the headquarters of
Iraq's intelligence service in order to send a firm response
and deter further threats. Similarly, on March 4, 1994, the
United States obtained convictions against the four defen-
dants in the bombing of the World Trade Center.

U.S. leadership and close coordination with other govern-
ments and international bodies will continue, as demon-
strated by the UN Security Council sanctions against Libya
for the Pan Am 103 and UTA 772 bombings, a new inter-
national convention dealing with detecting and controlling
plastic explosives, and two important counterterrorism
treaties — the Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful
Acts of Violence at Airports Serving International Aviation
and the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful
Attacks Against the Safety of Maritime Navigation.

Fighting Drug Trafﬁcking

The Administration has undertaken a new approach to the
global scourge of drug abuse and trafficking that will better
integrate domestic and international activities to reduce
both the demand and the supply of drugs. Ultimate
success will depend on concerted efforts and partnerships
by the public, all levels of government and the American
private sector with other governments, private groups and
international bodies.

The U.S. wiil shift its strategy from the past emphasis on
transit interdiction to a more evenly balanced effort with
source countries to build institutions, destroy trafficking
organizations and stop supplies. We will support and
strengthen democratic institutions abroad, denying
narcotics traffickers a fragile political infrastructure in
which to operate. We will also cooperate with govern-
ments that demonstrate the political will to confront the
narcotics threat.

A new comprehensive strategy has been developed to deal
with the problem of cocaine and another is being devel-
oped to address the growing threat from high-purity heroin
entering this country. We will engage more aggressively
with international organizations, ﬁnancial institutions and
nongovernmental organizations in counternarcotics coop-
eration.

At home and in the international arena, prevention, treat-
ment and economic alternatives must work hand-in-hand
with law enforcement and interdiction activities. Long-
term efforts will be maintained to help nations develop
healthy economies with fewer market incentives for
producing narcotics. U.S. efforts will increase efforts
abroad to foster public awareness and support for govern-
mental cooperation on a broad range of activities to
reduce the incidence of drug abuse. Public awareness of a
demand problem in producing or trafficking countries can
be converted into public support and increased govern-
mental law enforcement to reduce trafﬁcking and produc-
tion. There has been a signiﬁcant attitudinal change and
awareness in Latin America and the Caribbean, particu-
larly as producer and transit nations themselves become
plagued with the ill effects of consumption. '

Other Missions

The United States government is also responsible for
protecting the lives and safety of Americans abroad. In
order to carry out this responsibility, selected U.S. military
forces are trained and equipped to evacuate Americans
from such situations as the outbreak of civil or interna-
tional conflict and natural or man-made disasters. For
example, US. Marines evacuated Americans from
Monrovia, Liberia in August of 1990, and from
Mogadishu, Somalia, in December of that year. in 1991,
U.S. forces evacuated nearly 20,000 Americans from the
Philippines over a three—week period following the erup-
tion of Mount Pinatubo. This year, U.S. Marines coupled
with U.S. airlift, helped ensure the safe evacuation of U.S.
citizens from ethnic ﬁghting in Rwanda.

U.S. forces also provide invaluable training and advice to
friendly governments threatened by subversion, lawless-
ness or insurgency. At any given time, we have small
teams of military experts deployed in roughly 25 countries
helping host governments cope with such challenges.

U.S. military forces and assets are frequently called upon

to provide assistance to victims of floods, storms, drought
and other disasters. Both at home and abroad, U.S. forces
provide emergency food, shelter, medical care and secu-

rity to those in need.

Finally, the U.S. will continue as a world leader in space
through its technical expertise and innovation. Over the
past 30 years, as more and more nations have ventured

into space, the U.S. has steadfastly recognized space as an
international region. Since all nations are immediately
accessible from space, the maintenance of an international
legal regime for space, similar to the concept of freedom of
the high seas, is especially important. Numerous attempts
have been made in the past to legally limit access to space
by countries that are unable, either technologically or
economically, to join space-faring nations. As the
commercial importance of space is developed, the U.S.
can expect further pressure from non-participants to rede-
ﬁne the status of space, similar to what has been attempted
with exclusive economic zones constraining the high seas.

Retaining the current international character of space will
remain critical to achieving U.S. national security goals.
Our main objectives in this area include:

0 Continued freedom of access to and use of space;

- Maintaining the U.S. position as the major
economic, political, military and technological
power in space;

- Deterring threats to U.S. interests in space and
defeating aggression if deterrence fails;

- Preventing the spread of weapons of mass destruc-
tion to space; .

- Enhancing global partnerships with other space-
faring nations across the spectrum of economic,
political and security issues.

Deciding When and How to Employ
U.S. Forces

Our strategy calls for the development and deployment of
American military forces in the United States and abroad
to respond to key dangers —— those posed by weapons of
mass destruction, regional aggression and threats to the
stability of states.

Although there may be many demands for U.S. involve-
ment, the need to husband scarce resources suggests that
we must carefully select the means and level of our partici-
pation in particular military operations. it is unwise to
specify in advance all the limitations we will place on our

10

use of force, but it is appropriate to identify several basic
principles that will guide our decisions on when to use
force. 

First, and foremost, our national interests will dictate the
pace and extent of our engagement. In all cases, the costs
and risks of U.S. military involvement must be judged to
be commensurate with the stakes involved. In those
specific areas where our vital or survival interests — those
of broad, overriding importance to the survival, security
and vitality of our national entity — are at stake, our use of
force will be decisive and, if necessary, unilateral. in other
situations posing a less immediate threat, our military
engagement must be targeted selectively on those areas
that most affect our national interests — for instance, areas
where we have a sizable economic stake or commitments
to allies, and areas where there is a potential to generate
substantial refugee flows into our nation or our allies.

Second, as much as possible, we will seek the help of our
aliies or of relevant multilateral institutions. If our most
important national interests are at stake, we are prepared
to act alone. But especially on those matters touching
directly the interests of our allies, there should be a propor-
tional commitment from them.

Third, in every case, we will consider several critical ques-
tions before committing military force. Have we consid-
ered nonmilitary means that offer a reasonable chance of
success? What types of US. military capabilities should
be brought to bear, and is the use of military force care-
fully matched to our political objectives? Do we have
reasonable assurance of support from the American people
and their elected representatives? Do we have timelines
and milestones that will reveal the extent of success or
failure, and, in either case, do we have an exit strategy?

Fourth, our engagement must meet reasonable cost and
feasibility thresholds. We will be more inclined to act
where there is reason to believe that our action will bring
lasting improvement. On the other hand, our involvement
will be more circumscribed when other regional or multi-
lateral actors are better positioned to act than we are. Even
in these cases, however, the United States will be actively
engaged at the diplomatic level.

Combatting the Spread and Use of
Wea ons of Mass Destruction and
Missiles

Weapons of mass destruction — nuclear, biological, and
chemical — along with the missiles that deliver them, pose
a major threat to our security and that of our allies and
other friendly nations. Thus, a key part of our strategy is to
seek to stem the proliferation of such weapons and to
develop an effective capability to deal with these threats.
We also need to maintain robust strategic nuclear forces
while seeking to implement existing strategic arms
agreements.

Nonproliferation and Counterproliferation

A critical priority for the United States is to stem the prolif-
eration of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass
destruction and their missile delivery systems. Countries’
weapons programs, and their levels of cooperation with
our nonproliferation efforts, will be among our most
important criteria in judging the nature of our bilateral
relations.

As a key part of our effort to control nuclear proliferation,
we seek the indefinite extension of the Nonproliferation
Treaty (NPT) beyond 1995 and its universal application.
Achieving a Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty as soon as
possible, ending the unsafeguarded production of fissile
materials for nuclear weapons purposes and strengthening
the Nuclear Suppliers Group and the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) are important goals. They comple-
ment our comprehensive efforts to discourage the accumu-
lation of fissile materials, to seek to strengthen controls and
constraints on those materials, and overtime, to reduce
world-wide stocks.

To combat missile proliferation, the United States seeks
prudently to broaden membership of the Missile
Technology Control Regime (MTCRl. The Administration
supports the prompt ratification and earliest possible entry
in force of the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) as
well as new measures to deter violations of and enhance
compliance with the Biological Weapons Convention
IBWCJ. We also support improved export controls for
nonproliferation purposes both domestically and
multilaterally.

The proliferation problem is global, but we must tailor our
approaches to specific regional contexts. We are leading
international efforts to bring North Korea into compliance
with its nonproliferation obligations, including the NPT,
IAEA safeguards, and the North-South denuclearization
accord. We will continue efforts to prevent Iran from
advancing its weapons of mass destruction objectives and
to thwart Iraq from reconstituting its previous programs.
The United States seeks to cap, reduce and, ultimately,
eliminate the nuclear and missile capabilities of lndia and
Pakistan. In the Middle East and elsewhere, we encourage
regional arms control agreements that address the legiti-
mate security concerns of all parties. These tasks are being
pursued with other states that share our concern for the
enormous challenge of stemming the proliferation of such
weapons.

The United States has signed bilateral agreements with
Russia and Ukraine, which commit both these countries to
adhere to the guidelines of the MTCR. Russia has agreed
not to transfer space-launch vehicle technology with
potential military applications to India. South Africa has
joined the NPT and accepted full-scope safeguards.
Argentina has joined the MTCR and Brazil has committed
itself publicly to adhere to the MTCR guidelines.
Argentina, Brazil and Chile have brought the Treaty of
Tlatelolco into force. We continue to push for the disman-
tlement of intercontinental ballistic missiles located in
Ukraine and Kazakhstan and to press China to formalize
its earlier MTCR undertakings. With the United States and
Russia, Ukraine is pressing forward on implementation of
the Trilateral Accord, which provides for the transfer of
warheads from Ukraine to Russia in return for fair compen-
sation for their value.

Thus, the United States seeks to prevent additional coun-
tries from acquiring chemicai, biological and nuclear
weapons and the means to deliver them. However, should
such efforts fail, U.S. forces must be prepared to deter,
prevent and defend against their use.

The United States will retain the capacity to retaliate
against those who might contemplate the use of weapons
of mass destruction, so that the costs of such use will be
seen as outvveighing the gains. However, to minimize the
impact of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction on
our interests, we will need the capability not only to deter
their use against either ourselves or our allies and friends,
but also, where necessary and feasible, to prevent it.

11

 

This will require improved defensive capabilities. To mini-
mize the vulnerability of our forces abroad to weapons of
mass destruction, we are placing a high priority on
improving our ability to locate, identify, and disable arse-
nals of weapons of mass destruction, production and
storage facilities for such weapons, and their delivery
systems.

Strategic Nuclear Forces.

We will retain strategic nuclear forces sufficient to deter
any future hostile foreign leadership with access to
strategic nuclear forces from acting against our vital inter-
ests and to convince it that seeking a nuclear advantage
would be futile. Therefore we will continue to maintain
nuclear forces of sufficient size and capability to hold at
risk a broad range of assets valued by such political and
military leaders. We are engaged in a review to determine
what nuclear posture is required in the current world situa-
tion. T

The strategic arms control process, with its prescribed
reductions in strategic offensive arms and steady shift
toward less destabilizing systems, remains indispensable.
The U.S. is committed to the ratification and entry into
force of the START I and II Treaties. Although Ukraine has
yet to accede to the Non-Proliferation Treaty, the Rada's
action on 3 February 1994 to ratify the START I Treaty and
the Lisbon Protocol without reservations places Ukraine
back on track toward becoming a Non-Nuclear Weapons
State. The U.S. is also reviewing whether future reductions
in strategic forces below START II levels are advisable. We
will also explore strategic confidence-building measures
and lTIUl1Jal understandings that reduce the risk of
accidental war.

Arms Control

Arms control is an integral part of our national security
strategy. Arms controi can help reduce incentives to initiate
attack; enhance predictability regarding the size and struc-
ture of forces, thus reducing fear of aggressive intent;
reduce the size of national defense industry establishments
and thus permit the growth of more vital, nonmilitary
industries; ensure oonﬁdence in compliance through effec-
tive monitoring and verification; and, ultimately, contribute
to a more stable and calculable balance of power.

12

As noted above, arms control is an integral part of our
strategy to limit the spread of nuclear, chemical and
biological weapons, and to limit the strategic nuclear
forces which could still pose a direct threat to the United
States.

The full and faithful implementation of existing arms
control agreements, including the ABM Treaty, BWC, INF,
CFE, several nuclear testing agreements, the 1992 Vienna
Document on CSBMs, Open Skies, the Environmental
Modification Convention (EnMod), Incidents at Sea and
many others will remain an important element of national
security policy. The on-going negotiation initiated by the
United States to clarify the ABM Treaty by establishing an
agreed demarcation between strategic and theater ballistic
missiles and update the Treaty to reflect the break-up of
the Soviet Union reflects the Administration's commitment
to maintaining the integrity and effectiveness of crucial
arms control agreements.

Future arms control efforts may become more regional and

multilateral. Regional arrangements can add prediaability
and openness to security relations, advance the rule of
international law and promote cooperation among partici-
pants. They help maintain deterrence and a stable military
balance at regional levels. The U.S. is prepared to
promote, help negotiate, monitor and participate in
regional arms control undertakings compatible with
American national security interests. We will generally
support such undertakings but will not seek to impose
regional arms control accords against the wishes of
affected states.

As arms control, whether regional or global, becomes
increasingly multilateral, the Conference on Disarmament
(CD) in Geneva will play an even more important role.
The U.S. will support measures to increase the effective-
ness and relevance of the CD. Arms control agreements
can head off potential arms races in certain weapons cate-
gories or in some environments. We will continue to seek
greater transparency, responsibility and, where appro-
priate, restraint in the transfer of conventional weapons
and global military spending must increase. The UN
register of conventional arms transfers is a start in
promoting greater transparency of weapons transfers and
buildups, but more needs to be done. The U.S. has
proposed that the new regime to succeed the Coordinating
Committee (COCOM) focus on conventional arms sales
and dual-use technologies. Where appropriate, the United

States will continue to pursue such efforts vigorously.
Measures to reduce over-sized defense industrial establish-
ments, especially those parts involved with weapons of
mass destruction, will also contribute to stability in the
post-Cold War world. The Administration also will pursue
defense conversion agreements with FSU states, and
possibly China.

Peace Operations

In addition to preparing for major regional contingencies,

"we must prepare our forces for peace operations to support

democracy or conflict resolution. The United States, along
with others in the international community, will seek to
prevent and contain localized conflicts before they require
a military response. U.S. support capabilities such as airlift,
intelligence, and global communications, have often
contributed to the success of multilateral peace operations,
and they will continue to do so. U.S. combat units are less
likely to be used for most peace operations, but in some
cases their use will be necessary or desirable and justified
by U.S. national interests as guided by the Presidential
Decision Directive, ”U.S. Policy on Reforming Multilateral
Peace Operations," and outlined below.

Multilateral peace operations are an important component
of our strategy. From traditional peacekeeping to peace
enforcement, multilateral peace operations are sometimes
the best way to prevent, contain, or resolve conflicts that
could otherwise be far more costly and deadly.

Peace operations often have served, and continue to serve,
important U.S. national interests. In some cases, they have
helped preserve peace between nations, as in Cyprus and
the Golan Heights. in others, peacekeepers have provided
breathing room for fledgling democracies, as in Cambodia,
El Salvador and Namibia.

At the same time,’ however, we must recognize that peace
operations make demands on the UN that exceed the
organization's current capabilities. The United States is
working with the UN headquarters and other member
states to ensure that the UN embarks only on peace oper-
ations that make political and military sense and that the
UN is able to manage effectively those peace operations it
does undertake. We support the creation of a professional
U N peace operations headquarters with a planning staff,
access to timely intelligence, a logistics unit that can be
rapidly deployed and a modern operations center with

global communications. The United States is committed to
working with the United Nations to see that we pay our
bills in full, while reducing our nation's proportional
assessment for these missions.

When deciding whether to support a particular UN peace
operation, the United States will insist that fundamental
questions be asked before new obligations are undertaken.
These include an assessment of the threat to international
peace and security, a determination that the peace opera-
tion serves U.S. interests as well as assurance of an interna-
tional community of interests for dealing with that threat
on a multilateral basis, identification of clear objectives,
availability of the necessary resources, and identification of
an operation’s endpoint or criteria for completion.

Most UN peacekeeping operations do not involve U.S.
forces. On those occasions when we consider contributing
U.S. forces to a UN peace operation, we will employ
rigorous criteria, including the same principles that would
guide any decision to employ U.S. forces. In addition, we
will ensure that l2l'l8 risks to US. personnel and the
command and control arrangements governing the partici-
pation of American and foreign forces are acceptable to
the United States.

The question of command and control is particularly crit-
ical. There may be tlmes when it is in our interest to place
U.S. troops under the temporary operational control of a
competent UN or allied commander. The United States
has done so many times in the past —— from the siege of
Yorktown in the Revolutionary War to the battles of Desert
Storm. However, under no circumstances will the
President ever relinquish his command authority over U.S.
forces.

Improving the ways the United States and the UN decide
upon and conduct peace operations will not make the
decision to engage any easier. The lesson we must take
away from our first ventures in peace operations is not that
we should foreswear such operations but that we should
employ this tool selectively and more effectively. In short, _
the United States views peace operations as a means to
support our national security strategy, not as a strategy
unto itself.

The President is ﬁrmly committed to securing the active
support of Congress for U.S. participation in peace opera-
tions. The Administration has set forth a detailed blueprint

 

to guide Consultations with Congress. With respect to
particular operations, the Administration will undertake
such consultations on questions regarding command and
control of U.S. forces, the nature of expected U.S. military
participation, the mission parameters of the operation, the
expected duration, and budgetary implications. In addition
to such operation-specific consultations, the
Administration has also conducted regular monthly brief-
ings for congressional staff, and will deliver an Annual
Comprehensive Report to Congress on Peace Operations.
Congress is critical to the institutional development of a
successful U.S. policy on peace operations.

Two other points deserve emphasis. First, the primary
mission of our Armed Forces is not peace operations; it is
to deter and, if necessary, to ﬁght and win conflicts in
which our most important interests are threatened.
Second, while the international community can create
conditions for peace, the responsibility for peace ulti-
mately rests with the people of the country in question.

Strong intelligence Capabilities

Only a strong intelligence effort can provide adequate
warning of threats to U.S. national security and identify
opportunities for advancing our interests. Policy analysts,
decision makers and military commanders at all levels will
continue to rely on our intelligence community to collect
and analyze information unavailable from other sources
and which provides an essential complement to foreign
service reporting, media reports and private analysts who
rely entirely on open sources.

Because national security has taken on a much broader
deﬁnition in this post-Cold War era, intelligence must
address a much wider range of threats and dangers. We
will continue to monitor military and technical threats, to
guide long-term force development and weapons acquisi-
tion, and to directly support military operations.
Intelligence will also be critical for directing new efforts
against regional conflicts, proliferation of WMD, counter-
intelligence, terrorism and narcotics trafficking. In order to
adequately forecast dangers to democracy and to U.S.
economic well-being, the intelligence community must
track political, economic, social and military develop-
ments in those parts of the world where U.S. interests are
most heavily engaged and where overt collection of infor-
mation from open sources is inadequate. Finally, to
enhance the study and support of worldwide environ-

14

mental, humanitarian and disaster relief activities, tech-
nical inteliigence assets (principally imagery) must be
directed to a greater degree towards collection of data on
these subjects.

Economic intelligence will play an increasingly important
role in helping policy makers understand economic trends.
Economic intelligence can support U.S. trade negotiators
and help level the economic playing ﬁeld by identifying
threats to U.S. companies from foreign intelligence
services and unfair trading practices.

This strategy requires that we take steps to reinforce
current intelligence capabilities and overt foreign service
reporting, within the limits of our resources, and similar
steps to enhance coordination of clandestine and overt
collection. Key goals include to:

- Provide timely warning of strategic threats, whether
from the remaining arsenal of weapons in the former
Soviet Union or from other nations with weapons of
mass destruction;

- Ensure timely intelligence support to military opera-
tions;

0 Provide early warning of potential crises and facili-
tate preventive diplomacy;

- Develop new strategies for collection, production
and dissemination (including closer relationships
between intelligence producers and consumers) to
make intelligence products more responsive to
current consumer needs;

0 improve worldwide technical capabilities to detect,
identify and determine the efforts of foreign nations
to develop weapons of mass destruction;

0 |mprove_ counterintelligence efforts;
- Provide focussed support for law enforcement agen-
cies in areas like counternarcotics, counterterrorism

and illegal technology trade;

- Streamline intelligence operations and organizations
to gain efficiency and integration;

0 Revise long-standing security restrictions where
possible to make intelligence data more useful to
intelligence consumers.

- Strengthen intelligence relationships and sharing
with friendly foreign inteliigence services, especially
in areas where US. intelligence capabilities are
limited.

The Environment

The more clearly we understand the complex interrelation-
ships between the different parts of our world's environ-
ment, the better we can understand the regional and even
global effects of local changes to the environment.
Increasing competition for the dwindling reserves of
uncontaminated air, arable land, ﬁsheries and other food
sources, and water, once considered "free" goods, is
already a very real risk to regional stability around the
world. The range of environmental risks serious enough to
jeopardize international stability extends to massive popu-
lation flight from man-made or natural catastrophes, such
as Chernobyl or the East African drought, and to large-
scale ecosystem damage caused by industrial pollution,
deforestation, loss of biodiversity, ozone depletion, and
ultimately climate change. Strategies dealing with environ-
mental issues of this magnitude will require partnerships
between governments and nongovernmental organiza-
tions, cooperation between nations and regions, and a
commitment to a strategically focused, long-term policy for
emerging environmental risks.

The decisions we make today regarding military force
structures typically influence our ability to respond to
threats 20 to 30 years in the future. Similarly, our current
decisions regarding the environment will affect the magni-
tude of its security risks over at least a comparable period
of time, if not longer. The measure of our difficulties in the
future will be settled by the steps we take in the present.

As a priority initiative, the U.S. will press the global
community at the September Cairo Conference and in
other fora, to address the continuous climb in global popu-
lation. Rapid population growth in the developing world
and unsustainable consumption patterns in industrialized
nations are the root of both present and potentially even
greater forms of environmental degradation and resource
depletion. A conservative estimate of the g|obe's popula-
tion projects 8.5 billion people on the planet by the year

2025. Even when making the most generous allowances
for advances in science and technology, one cannot help
but conclude that population growth and environmental
pressures will feed into immense social unrest and make
the world substantialiy more vulnerable to serious interna-
tional frictions.

Promoting Prosperity at Home

A central goal of our national security strategy is to
promote America’s prosperity through efforts both at home
and abroad. Our economic and security interests are

_ increasingly inseparable. Our prosperity at home depends

on engaging actively abroad. The strength of our diplo-
macy, our ability to maintain an unrivaled military, the
attractiveness of our values abroad 4 all these depend in
part on the strength of our economy.

Enhancing American Competitiveness

Our primary economic goal is to strengthen the American
economy and reverse the decline in American competi-
tiveness that plagued our international economic perfor-
mance for over a decade. The first step toward that goal
was reducing the federal deficit and the burden it imposes
on the economy and future generations. The economic
program passed in 1993 will reduce the deficit by over
$500 million, restored investor conﬁdence in _the U.S. and
strengthened our position in international economic nego-
tiations. We are building on this deficit reduction effort
with other steps to improve American competitiveness:
investing in technology; assisting defense conversion;
improving information networks and other vital infrastruc-
ture; and improving education and training programs for
America's workforce. We are structuring our defense R&D
effort to place greater emphasis on dual-use technologies
that can enhance competitiveness and meet pressing mili-
tary needs. We are also reforming the defense acquisition
system so that we can develop and procure weapons and
materiel more efficiently.

Partnership with Business and Labor

Our economic strategy views the private sector as the
engine of economic growth. it sees government's role as a
partner to the private sector -— acting as an advocate of
U.S. business interests; leveling the playing field in interna-

15

Q

tional markets; helping to boost American exports; and
finding ways to remove domestic and foreign barriers to
the creativity, initiative and productivity of American
business.

To this end, on September 29, 1993, the Administration
published its report creating America's first national export
strategy and making 65 specific recommendations for
reforming the way government works with the private
sector to expand exports. Among the recommendations
were significant improvements in advocacy, export
ﬁnancing, market information systems and product stan-
dards education. The results of these reforms could enable
U.S. exports to reach the trillion dollar mark by the turn of
the century, which would help create at least six million
new American jobs.

Another critical element in boosting U.S. exports is
reforming the outdated export licensing system. Last year,
that reform began with signiﬁcant liberalization of export
licensing controls for computers, supercomputers and
telecommunications equipment. This year the
Administration is seeking comprehensive reform of the
Export Administration Act, which governs the process of
export licensing. The goal of this reform is to strengthen
our ability to prevent proliferation and protect other
national interests, while removing unnecessarily burden-
some licensing requirements left over from the Cold War.

Enhancing Access to Foreign Markets

The success of American business is more than ever
dependent upon success in international markets. The
ability to compete internationally also assures that our
companies will continue to innovate and increase produc-
tivity, which will in turn lead to improvements in our own
living standards. But to compete abroad, our ﬁrms need
access to foreign markets, just as foreign industries have
access to our open market. We vigorously pursue

measures to increase access for our companies —-— through ‘

bilateral, regional and multilateral arrangements.

The North American Free Trade Agreement
On December 3, 1993, President Clinton signed the North

American Free Trade Act (NAFTA), which creates a free
trade zone among the United States, Canada and Mexico.

16

NAFTA will create more than 200,000 American jobs and
it increases Mexico's capacity to cooperate with our nation
on a wide range of issues that cross our 2000 mile border
— including the environment, narcotics trafficking and
illegal immigration.

Asia Paciﬁc Economic Cooperation

Our economic relations depend vitally on our ties with the
Asia Paciﬁc region, which is the world’s fastest-growing
economic region. in November 1993, President Clinton
convened the first-ever summit of the leaders of the
economies that constitute the Organization for Asia Paciﬁc
Economic Cooperation (APEC). U.S. initiatives in the APEC
forum will open new opportunities for economic coopera-
tion and permit U.S. companies to become involved in
substantial infrastructure pianning and construction
throughout the region. The trade and investment frame-
work agreed to in 1993 provides the basis for enhancing
the "open regionalism" that defines APEC.

Uruguay Round of GATT

The successful conclusion in December 1993 of the
Uruguay Round of the negotiations under the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) signiﬁcantly
strengthened the world trading system. The Uruguay
Round accord is the largest, most comprehensive trade
agreement in history. It will create hundreds of thousands
of new U.S. jobs and expand opportunities for U.S. busi-
nesses, For the first time, international trade rules will
apply to services, intellectual property and investments,
and effective rules will apply to agriculture. The Uruguay
Round also continued the cuts in tariff rates throughout the
world that began just after the Second World War. The
Administration is committed to working with Congress to
passing GATT this year and ensuring that the promises
made to American industries in the Uruguay Round are
fulfilled.

U.S. - Japan Framework Agreement

While Japan is America's second-largest export market,
foreign access to the Japanese market remains limited in
many important sectors. Japan's persistent current account
surpluses are a major imbalance in the global economy. In
July 1993 President Clinton and Japanese Prime Minister

Miyazawa established the U.S.-Japan Framework for
Economic Partnership to redress the imbalances in our
economic relationship. By the February 1994 Summit
between President Clinton and Prime Minister Hosokawa,
Japan had not yet fulfilled key commitments under the
Framework agreement. The Administration is Continuing
efforts to ensure that competitive American goods and
services have fair access to the Japanese market. We
believe Japan must take measures to open its markets and
stimulate its economy, both to beneﬁt its own people and
to fulﬁll its international responsibilities

Expanding the Realm of Free Trade

The conclusion of NAFTA and the Uruguay Round repre-
sents unprecedented progress toward more open markets
both at the regional and global levels. The Administration
intends to continue its efforts in further enhancing U.S.
access to foreign markets. The World Trade Organization
will provide a powerful new institutional lever for securing
such access. Emerging markets, particularly along the
Paciﬁc Rim, present vast opportunities for American enter-
prise, and APEC now provides a suitable vehicle for the
exploration of such opportunities. The U.S. may also be
amenable to the possible establishment of free trade
regimes with other nations. All such steps in the direction
of expanded trading relationships will be undertaken in a
way consistent with protection of the international envi-
ronment and to the end of sustainable development here
and abroad.

Stren hening Macroeconomic
Coor rnatron

As national economies become more integrated interna-
tionally, the U.S. cannot drive global growth on its own.
international economic expansion will benefit from coordi-
nating the macroeconomic policies of the G—7 economies,
and especially the three major economies of the world —
the United States, Germany and Japan. To improve global
macroeconomic performance, we will continue to work
through the 07 "heads of state” and financial leader
meetings to seek growth-oriented policies to complement
our own budget deficit reduction efforts. Together we can
promulgate a growth strategy that combines reducing
budget deﬁcits in the U.S., lowering interest rates in
Germany and reducing current account surpluses in Japan.

Providing for Energy Security

The United States depends on oil for more than 40% of its
primary energy needs. Roughly 45% of our oil needs are
met with imports, and a large share of these imports come
from the Persian Gulf area. The experiences of the two oil
shocks and the Gulf War show that an interruption of oil
supplies can have a significant impact on the U.S.
economy. Appropriate economic responses can substan-
tially mitigate the balance of payments and inflationary
impacts of an oil shock; appropriate foreign policy
responses to events such as Iraq's invasion of Kuwait can
limit the magnitude of the crisis.

Over the longer term, the United States’ dependence on
access_to foreign oil sources will be increasingly important
as our resources are depleted. The U.S. economy has
grown roughly 75% since the ﬁrst oil shock; yet during
that time our oil consumption has remained virtually stable
and oil production has declined. High oil prices did not
generate enough new oil exploration and discovery to
sustain production levels from our depleted resource base.
These facts show the need for continued and extended
reliance on energy efﬁciency and conservation and devel-
opment of alternative energy sources. Conservation
measures notwithstanding, the U.S. has a vital interest in
unrestricted access to this critical resource.

Promoting Sustainable Development
Abroad

Broad-based economic development not only improves
the prospects for democratic development in developing
countries, but also expands the demands for U.S. expors.
Economic growth abroad can alleviate pressure on the
global environment, reduce the attraction of illegal
narcotics trade and improve the health and economic
productivity of global populations.

The environmental aspects of ill-designed economic

growﬂt are clear. Environmental damage-_wil| ultimately
block economic growth. Rapid urbanization is outstripping
the ability of nations to provide jobs, education, and other .
services to new citizens. The continuing poverty of a
quarter of the world's people leads to hunger, malnutrition,
economic migration, and political unrest. Widespread illit-
eracy and lack of technical skills hinder employment

17

opportunities and drive entire populations to support them-
selves on increasingly fragile and damaged resource bases.
New diseases and epidemics, often spread through envi-
ronmental degradation, threaten to overwhelm the health
facilities of developing countries, disrupt societies, and
stop economic growth. These realities must be addressed
by sustainable development programs which offer viable
alternatives. U.S. leadership is of the essence. if such alter-
natives are not developed, the consequences for the
planet's future will be grave indeed.

Domestically, the U.S. must work hard to halt local and
cross-border environmental degradation. In addition, the
U.S. should foster environmental technology targeting
pollution prevention, control, and cleanup. Companies
that invest in energy efficiency, clean manufacturing, and
environmental services today will create the high-quality,
high—wage jobs of tomorrow. By providing access to these
types of technologies, our exports can also provide the
means for other nations to achieve environmentally
sustainable economic growth. At the same time, we are
taking ambitious steps at home to better manage our
natural resources and reduce energy and other consump-
tion, decrease waste generation, and increase our recy-
cling efforts.

internationally, the Administration's foreign assistance
program focuses on four key elements of sustainable
development: broad-based economic growth; the environ-
ment; population and health; and democracy. We will
continue to advocate environmentally sound private
investment and responsible approaches by international
lenders. At our urging, the Multilateral Development Banks
(MDB’s) are now placing increased emphasis upon
sustainable development in their funding decisions, to
include a commitment to perform environmental assess-
ments on projects for both internal and public scrutiny. In
particular, the Global Environmental Facility (GEF), estab-
lished this year, will provide a source of ﬁnancial assis-
tance to the developing world for climate change, biodi-
versity, and oceans initiatives.

The U.S. is taking speciﬁc steps now in all of these areas:
I In June 1993, the United States signed the
Convention on Biological Diversity, which aims to

protect and utilize the world's genetic inheritance.
The Interior Department has been directed to create

18

a national biological survey to help protect species
and to help the agricultural and biotechnical indus-
tries identify new sources of food, ﬁber and medica-
tions.

0 New policies are being implemented to ensure the
sustainable management of U.S. forests by the year
2000, as pledged internationally. In addition, U.S.
bilateral forest assistance programs are being
expanded, and the United States is promoting
sustainable management of tropical forests.

0 in the wake of the 1992 United Nations Conference
on Environment and Development, the United States
has sought to reduce land-based sources of marine
poilution, maintain populations of marine species at
healthy and productive levels and protect endan-
gered marine mammals.

o The United States has focussed technical assistance
and encouraged nongovernmental environmental
groups to provide expertise to the republics of the
Former Soviet Union and East European nations that
have suffered the most acute environmental crises.
The Agency for International Development, the
Environmental Protection Agency and other U.S.
agencies are engaged in technical cooperation with
many countries around the world to advance these
goals.

- The Administration is leading a renewed global effort
to address population problems and promote inter-
national consensus for stabilizing world population
growth. Our comprehensive approach will stress
family planning and reproductive health care,
maternal and child health, education, and improving
the status of women. The International Conference
on Population Development, to be held in
September in Cairo, will endorse these approaches
as important strategies in achieving our global popu-
lation goals.

Promoting Democracy

All of America's strategic interests — from promoting pros-
perity at home to checking global threats abroad before
they threaten our territory —— are served by enlarging the

community of democratic and free market nations. Thus,
working with new democratic states to help preserve them
as democracies committed to free markets and respect for
human rights, is a key part of our national security strategy.

One of the most gratifying and encouraging developments
of the past 15 years is the explosion in the number of states
moving away from repressive governance and toward
democracy. Since the success of many of those experi-
ments is by no means assured, our strategy of enlargement
must focus on the consolidation of those regimes and the
broadening of their commitment to democracy. At the
same time, we seek to increase respect for fundamental
human rights in all states and encourage an evolution to
democracy where that is possible.

The enlargement of the community of market democracies
respecting human rights and the environment is manifest
in a number of ways:

- More than 20 nations in Eastern Europe, the former
Soviet Union, Latin America, and East Asia have,
over the past 10 years, adopted the structures of a
constitutional democracy and held free elections;

0 The nations of the Western Hemisphere have
proclaimed their commitment to democratic regimes
and to the collective responsibility of the nations of
the OAS to respond to threats to democracy.

0 in the Western Hemisphere, only Cuba and Haiti are
not democratic states;

0 Nations as diverse as South Africa. Cambodia and El
Salvador have resoived bitter internal disputes
with agreement on the creation of constitutional
democracies.

The first element of our democracy strategy is to work with
the other democracies of the world and to improve our
cooperation with them on security and economic issues.
We also seek their support in enlarging the realm of demo-
cratic nations.

The core of our strategy is to help democracy and markets
expand and survive in other places where we have the
strongest security concerns and where we can make the
greatest difference. This is not a democratic crusade; it is a

pragmatic commitment to see freedom take hold where
that will help us most. Thus, we must target our effort to
assist states that affect our strategic interests, such as those
with large eoonomies, critical locations, nuclear weapons,
or the potential to generate refugee flows into our own
nation or into key friends and allies. We must focus our
efforts where we have the most leverage. And our efforts
must be demancl—driven — they must focus on nations
whose people are pushing for reform or have already
Secured it.

Russia is a key state in this regard. If we can support and
heip consolidate democratic and market reforms in Russia
(and the other newiy independent states), we can help turn
a former threat into a region of valued diplomatic and
economic partners. In addition, our efforts in Russia,
Ukraine and the other states raise the likelihood of
continued reductions in nuclear arms and compliance
with international nonproliferation accords.

The new democracies in Central and Eastern Europe are
another clear example, given their proximity to the great
democratic powers of Western Europe, their importance to
our security, and their potential markets.

Since our ties across the Pacific are no less important than
those across the Atlantic, pursuing enlargement in the
Asian Pacific is a third example. We will work to support
the emerging democracies of the region and to encourage
other states along the same path.

Continuing the great strides toward democracy and
markets in our emerging hemisphere is also a key concern
and lies behind the President's decision to host the Summit
of the Americas this December. As we continue such
efforts, we should be on the lookout for states whose entry
into the camp of market democracies may inﬂuence the
future direction of an entire region; South Africa and
Nigeria now hold that potential with regard to sub-Saharan
Africa.

How should the United States help consolidate and
enlarge democracy and markets in these states? The
answers are as varied as the nations involved, but there are
common elements. We must continue to help lead the
effort to mobilize international resources, as we have with
Russia and the other new states. We must be willing to
take immediate public positions to help staunch democ-

19

ratic reversals, as we have in Haiti, Guatemala and
Nigeria. We must give democratic nations the fullest bene-
fits of integration into foreign markets, which is part of why
NAFTA and the GATT rank so high on our agenda. And
we must help these nations strengthen the pillars of civil
society, improve their market institutions, and ﬁght corrup-
tion and political discontent through practices of good
governance. '

At the same time as we work to ensure the success of
emerging democracies, we must also redouble our efforts
to guarantee basi_c human rights on a global basis. At the
1993 United Nations Conference on Human Rights, the
U.S. forcefully and successfully argued for a reaffirmation
of the universality of such rights and improved interna-
tional mechanisms for their promotion. In the wake of this
gathering, the UN has named a High Commissioner for
Human Rights, and the rights of women have been
afforded a new international precedence. The U.S. also
continues to work for the protection of human rights on a
bilateral basis. To demonstrate our own willingness to
adhere to international human rights standards, the
Administration will seek Senate consent to U.S. ratiﬁcation
of international conventions prohibiting discrimination on
the basis of race and against women.

in all these efforts, a policy of engagement and enlarge-
ment should take on a second meaning: we should
pursue our goals through an enlarged circle not only of
government officials but also of private and non-govern-
mental groups. Private firms are natural allies in our efforts
to strengthen market economies. Similarly, our goal of
strengthening democracy and civil society has a natural
ally in labor unions, human rights groups, environmental
advocates, chambers of commerce, and election monitors.
Just as we rely on force multipliers in defense, we should
welcome these "diplomacy multipliers,” such as the
National Endowment for Democracy.

Supporting the global movement toward democracy
requires a pragmatic and long-term effort focussed on both
values and institutions. The United States must build on
the opportunities achieved through the successful conclu-

20

sion of the Cold War. Our long—term goal is a world in
which each of the major powers is democratic, with many
other nations joining the community of market democra-
cies as well.

Our efforts to promote democracy and human rights are
complemented by our humanitarian assistance programs
which are designed to alleviate human suffering and to
pave the way for progress towards establishing democratic
regimes with a commitment to respect for human rights
and appropriate strategies for economic development.

Through humanitarian assistance and policy initiatives
aimed at the sources of disruption, we seek to mitigate the
contemporary migration and refugee crises, foster long-
term global cooperation and strengthen involved interna-
tional institutions. The U.S. will provide appropriate finan-
cial support and will work with other nations and interna-
tional bodies, such as the International Red Cross and the
UN High Commissioner for Refugees, in seeking voluntary
repatriation of refugees —— taking into full consideration
human rights concerns as well as the economic conditions
that may have driven them out in the first place. Helping
refugees return to their homes in Mozambique,
Afghanistan, Eritrea, Somalia and Guatemala, for example,
is a high priority.

Relief efforts will continue for people displaced by the
conflict in Bosnia and other republics of the former
Yugoslavia. We will act in concert with other nations and
the UN against the illegal smuggling ofChinese into this
country. Efforts will continue to induce the military forces
in Haiti to accept the instailation of its democratically
elected government, in part to help stem the flow of
Haitians attempting entry into the United States.

lll. integrated Regional
Approaches

The United States is a genuinely global power. Our policy
toward each of the world's regions reflects our overall
strategy tailored to their unique challenges and opportuni-
ties. This section highlights the application of our strategy‘
to each of the world’s regions; our broad objectives and
thrust, rather than an exhaustive list of all our policies and
interests. It illustrates how we integrate our commitment to
the promotion of democracy and the enhancement of
American prosperity with our security requirements to
produce a mutually reinforcing policy.

Europe and Eurasia

Our strategy of enlargement and engagement is central to
U.S. policy towards post-Cold War Europe. European
stability is vital to our own security, a lesson we have
learned twice at great cost this century. Vibrant European
economies mean more jobs for Americans at home and
investment opportunities abroad. With the collapse of the
Soviet empire and the emergence of new democracies in
its wake, the United States has an unparalleled opportunity
to contribute toward a free and undividedfurope. Our
goal is an integrated democratic Europe cooperating

with the United States to keep the peace and promote

prosperity.

The first and most important element of our strategy in
Europe must be security through military strength and
cooperation. The Cold War is over, but war itself is not
over.

As we know, it rages in the former Yugoslavia. While that
war does not pose an immediate threat to our security or
warrant unilateral U.S. involvement, U.S. policy is

focussed on four goals: preventing the spread of the
fighting into a broader European war that could threaten
both allies and the stability of new democratic states in
Central and Eastern Europe; stemming the destabilizing
flow of refugees from the conflict; halting the slaughter of
innocents; and helping to confirm NATO’s central role in
post-Cold War Europe.

Our leadership paved the way to NATO's February
ultimatum that ended the Serb shelling of Sarajevo and
restored calm to Bosnia’s capital. Our diplomatic leader-
ship brought an end to the fighting between the Muslims
and Croats in Bosnia and helped establish a bicommunal
Bosnian-Croat Federation. We have played a leading role
in the Contact Group, in tandem with the European Union
and the Russian Federation, in forging a plan for a compre-
hensive settlement to the Bosnian conflict. In addition, the
U.S., through the Sarajevo airlift and airdrops throughout
Bosnia-Herzegovina, has provided the largest quantity of
humanitarian aid of any nation. We have led the way in
NATO's decisions to enforce the no-fly zone, to protect
UN troops if they are attacked, to enforce the economic
sanctions against Serbia on the Adriatic and, most recently,
to end the Serb’s assault on Gorazde. And we have
deployed peacekeeping troops to the Former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia to prevent the spillover of the
conflict, as well as laying down a firm warning to Serbia
against escalation of violence in Kosovo.

The murderous conflict in Yugoslavia reminds us that mili-
tary forces remain relevant in a post-Cold War world. It
also reveals the difﬁculties of applying military force to
conflicts within as well as among states. And it teaches us
that it is best to act early to prevent conﬂicts that we may
later not be able to control.

 

As we work to resolve that tragedy and ease the suffering
of its victims we also need to change our security institu-
tions so they can better address such conflictsand advance
Europe's integration. Many institutions will play a role,
including the European Union, the Western European
Union, the Council of Europe, the Conference for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and the United Nations. But
NATO, history's greatest political-military alliance, must
be central to that process.

Only NATO has the military forces, the integrated

command structure, the broad legitimacy and the habits of ‘

cooperation that are essential to draw in new participants
and respond to new challenges. One of the deepest trans-
formations within the transatlantic community over the
past half-century occurred because the armed forces of our
respective nations trained, studied and marched through
their careers together. It is not only the compatibility of our
weapons, but the camaraderie of our warriors that provide
the sinews behind our mutual security guarantees and our
best hope for peace.

Since the end of the Cold War, the United States has
signiﬁcantly reduced the level of U.S. military forces
stationed in Eu rope. We have determined that a force of
roughly 100,000 U.S. military personnel assigned to U.S.
European command will preserve U.S. influence and lead-
ership in NATO and provide a deterrent posture that is
visible to both Western and Eastern Europeans. While we
continue to examine the proper mix of forces, this level of
permanent presence, augmented by fonvard deployed
naval forces and reinforcements available from the U.S., is
sufficient to respond to plausible crises and contributes to
stability in the region. Such a force level also provides a
sound basis for U.S. participation in multinational training
and preserves the capability to deter or respond to larger
threats in Europe and to support limited NATO operations
"out of area.”

With the end of the Cold War, NATO's mission is
evolving; today NATO plays a crucial role helping to
manage ethnic and national conflict in Europe. With U.S.
leadership, NATO has provided the muscle that is helping
to bring about a peaceful settlement in the former
Yugoslavia. NATO air power enforces the UN—mandated
no-fly zone and provides support to UN peacekeepers.
Our firm ultimatum in February 1994 finally brought an
end to the sheliing of Sarajevo, and NATO's April decision

22

ended the siege of Gorazde. NATO stands ready to help
support the peace once the parties reach an agreement.

With the adoption of the U.S. initiative, Partnership for
Peace, at the January 1994 summit, NATO is playing an
increasingly important role in our strategy of European
integration, extending the scope of our security coopera-
tion to the new democracies of Europe. Twenty-one
nations, including Russia, have already joined the partner-
ship, which will pave the way for a growing program of
military cooperation and political consultation. Partner
countries are sending representatives to NATO headquar-
ters near Brussels and to a military coordination cell at
Mons — the site of SHAPE. Joint exercises will take place
later this year in Poland and the Netherlands.

In keeping with our strategy of enlargement, PFP is open to
all former members of the Warsaw Pact as well as other
European states. Each partner will set the scope and pace
of its cooperation with NATO. During his trip to Europe in
July, the President reaffirmed his commitment to N/\TO’s
future expansion, with PFP the best path toward NATO
membership. The aim of NATO's future expansion,
however, will not be to draw a new line in Europe further
east, but to expand stability, democracy, prosperity and
security cooperation to an ever-broader Europe.

The second element of the new strategy for Europe is
economic. The United States seeks to build on vibrant and
open market economies, the engines that have given us
the greatest prosperity in human history over the last
several decades in Europe and in the United States. To this
end, we strongly support the process of European integra-
tion embodied in the European Union, seek to deepen our
partnership with the EU in support of our economic goals
but also oommit ourselves to the encouragement of bilat-
eral trade and investment in countries not part of the EU.

The nations of the European Union face particularly severe
economic chailenges with nearly 20 million people unem-
ployed and, in Germany's case, the extraordinarily high
costs of unification. Among the Atlantic nations, economic
stagnation has clearly eroded public support in finances for
outward-looking foreign policies and for greater integra-
tion. We are working closely with our West European part-
ners to expand employment and promote longterm
growth, building on the results of the Detroit Jobs
Conference and the Naples G-7 Summit.

As we work to strengthen our own economies, we must
know that we serve our own prosperity and our security by
helping the new market reforms in the new democracies in
Europe’s East that will help to deﬂate the region's dema-
gogues. It will help ease ethnic tensions. It will help new
democracies take root.

In Russia, the economic transformation undertaken will go
down as one of the great historical events of this century.
The Russian Government has made remarkable progress
toward privatizing the economy and reducing inflation.
But much remains to be done to build on the reform
momentum to assure durable economic recovery and
social protection. President Clinton has given strong and
consistent support to this unprecedented reform effort, and
has mobilized the international community to provide
structural economic assistance.

The short-termdifﬁculties of taking Central and Eastern
Europe into Western economic institutions will be more
than rewarded if they succeed and if they are customers
for America’s and Western Europe's goods and services
tomorrow. That is why this Administration has been
committed to increase support substantially for market
reforms in the new states of the former Soviet Union, and
why we have continued our support for economic transi-
tion in Central and Eastern Europe, while also paying
attention to measures that can overcome the social dislo-
cations which have resulted largely from the collapse of
the Soviet-dominated regional trading system.

Ultimately, the su ocess of market reforms to the East will
depend more on trade than aid. No one nation has
enough money to markedly change the future of those
countries as they move to free market systems. One of our
priorities, therefore, is to reduce trade barriers with the
former communist states.

The third and ﬁnal imperative of this new strategy is to
support the growth of democracy and individual freedoms
that has begun in Russia, the nations of the former Soviet
Union and Europe's former communist states. The success
of these democratic reforms makes us all more secure;
they are the best answer to the aggressive nationalism and
ethnic hatreds unleashed by the end of the Cold War.
Nowhere is democracy’s success more important to us all
than in these countries,

This will be the work of generations. There will be wrong
turns and even reversals, as there have been in all coun-
tries throughout history. But as long as these states
continue their progress toward democracy and respect the
rights of their own and other people, that they understand
the rights of their minorities and their neighbors, we will
support their progress with a steady patience.

East Asia and the Pacific

East Asia is a region of growing importance for U.S. secu-
rity and prosperity; nowhere are the strands of our three-
pronged strategy more intertwined, nor is the need for
continued U.S. engagement more evident. Now more than
ever, security, open markets and democracy go hand in
hand in our approach to this dynamic region. President
Clinton envisions an integrated strategy — a New Pacific
Community — which links security requirements with
economic realities and our concern for democracy and
human rights.

In thinking about Asia, we must remember that security
comes first. The United States intends to remain active in
that region. We are a Paciﬁc nation. We have fought three
wars there in this century. To deter regional aggression and
secure our own interests, we will maintain an active pres-
ence and we will continue to lead. Our deep bilateral ties
with allies such as Japan, South Korea, Australia, Thailand,
and the Philippines, and a continued, committed
American military presence will serve as a bedrock for
America's security role in the Asia-Paciﬁc region.
Currently, our forces number nearly 100,000 personnel in
this critical region. In addition to performing the general
fonvvard depioyment functions outlined above, they
contribute to deterring aggression and adventurism by the
North Korean regime.

As the first pillar of our New Paciﬁc Community, we are
pursuing stronger efforts to combat the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction on the Korean peninsula and
in South Asia. We have instituted new regional dialogues
on the full range of common security challenges. Our goal
is to integrate, not isolate the region's powers and to find
solutions, short of conflict, to the area's continuing security
challenges.

 

The second pillar of our new Pacific Community and the
challenge for the Asian Pacific region in this decade is to
develop multiple new arrangements to meet multiple
threats and opportunities. These arrangements can function
like overlapping plates of armor, individually providing
protection and together covering the full body of our
common security concerns.

Our strong commitment to the region, and our active
engagement are the foundation of our efforts to secure
peace and stability on a nonnuclear Korean peninsula. We
are prepared to engage in broad and thorough discussions
with North Korea to resolve a variety of issues, provided
that the North acts in good faith and while it keeps major
elements of its nuclear program "frozen.” But if North
Korea pursues nuclear weapons development, we will do
what it takes, in concert with allies and friends, to assure
South Korea's security and maintain international pressure
on the Pyongyang regime. Our long run objective
continues to be a non-nuclear, peacefully reuniﬁed Korean
Peninsula.

If security problems persist in Asia, so do new opportuni-
ties for economic progress. Just three decades ago, Asia
had only 8% of the world's GDP. Today, it exceeds 25%.
Asian economies are growing at three times the rate of the
more established industrial nations.

The growth of Asia can and will beneﬁt our nation. Over
the past five years, our exports to many Asian nations have
increased by 50% or more. Much of what Asia needs to
continue its growth are goods and services in which we
are strong. Already, Asia is our largest trading partner.
Exports to Asia account for 2.5 million jobs.

We are working with Japan to bring about the implemen-
tation of the 1993 Framework Agreement, to ensure that
the economic leg of that relationship is as healthy and
vibrant as our political and security links.

We are developing a broader engagement with the
People's Republic of China that will encompass both our
economic and strategic interests. That policy is best
reﬂected in our decision to delink China's Most Favored
Nation status from its record on human rights. We are also
working to facilitate China's development of a more open,
market economy that accepts international trade practices.
Given its growing economic potential and already sizable

24

military force, it is essential that China not become a secu-
rity threat to the region. To that end, we are strongly
promoting China's participation in regional security mech-
anisms to reassure its neighbors and assuage its own secu-
rity concerns. And we are seeking to gain further coopera-
tion from China in controlling the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction.

We are also moving to take advantage of evolving multilat-
eral mechanisms. The APEC summit, hosted by President
Clinton last year, is vivid testimony to the possibilities of
stimulating regional economic cooperation.

The third pillar of our policy in building a new Paciﬁc
community is to support the wave of democratic reform
sweeping the region. The new democratic states of Asia
will have our strong support as they move forward to
consolidate and expand democratic reforms.

Some have argued that democracy is somehow unsuited
for Asia or at least for some Asian nations — that human
rights are relative and that they simply mask Western
culturalism and imperialism. These voices are wrong. It is
not Western imperialism, but the aspirations of Asian
peoples themselves that explain the growing number of
democracies and the growing strength of democracy
movements everywhere in Asia. it is an insult to the spirit,
the hopes, and the dreams of the people who live and
struggle in those countries to assert otherwise.

Each nation must find its own form of democracy. But
there is no cultural justification for torture or tyranny. We
refuse to let repression cloak itself in moral relativism, for
democracy and human rights are not occidental yearnings;
they are universal yearnings and universal norms. We will
continue to press for respect for human rights in countries
as diverse as China and Burma.

The Western Hemisphere

The Western hemisphere, too, is a fertile field for a strategy
of engagement and enlargement. Sustained improvements
in the security situation there, incl.uding the resolution of
border tensions, control of insurgencies and containment
of pressures for arms proliferation, will be an essential
underpinning of political and economic progress in the
hemisphere.

The unprecedented triumph of democracy and market
economies throughout the region offers an unparalleled
opportunity to secure the benefits of peace and stability,
and to promote economic growth and trade. Ratification of
NAFTA is one of our most important foreign policy
achievements, because it advances all three of our central
objectives: not only does it mean new jobs and new
opportunities for American workers and business, but it
also represents an important step in solidifying the hemi-
spheric community of democracies. Vice President Gore
has called NAFTA ”a starting point for dealing with the
common challenges of the Americas.”

At the Summit of the Americas this December, President
Clinton will bring together the region's leaders to explore
new ways to further this process of integration. The
Summit will address three broad themes: promoting
democracy, increasing prosperity and trade ties, and
achieving sustainable development.

At the same time, we remain committed to extending
democracy to the handful of remaining outposts where the
region’s people are not free. Our overarching objective is
to preserve the dominance of civilian elected governments
and promote their evolution into functioning democratic
societies respectful of human rights. in Haiti we are
working with the international community to reverse the
military coup and restore democracy. The Cuban
Democracy Act remains the framework for our policy
toward Cuba; our goal is the peaceful establishment of
democratic governance for the people of Cuba.

We are working with our neighbors through the OAS to
invigorate regional cooperation. Both bilaterally and
regionally, we seek to eliminate the scourge of drug traf-
ficking, which poses a serious threat to democracy and
security. We also seek to strengthen norms for defense
establishments that are supportive of democracy, respect
for human rights, and civilian control in defense matters.
Finally, protecting the region’s precious environmental
resources is an important priority.

The Middle East, Southwest and
South Asia

The United States has enduring interests in the Middle
East, especially pursuing a comprehensive breakthrough to
Middle East peace, assuring the security of Israel and our-

Arab friends, and maintaining the free flow of oil at
reasonable pricai. Our strategy is harnessed to the unique
characteristics of the region and our vital interests there, as
we work to extend the range of peace and stability, while
implementing a strategy of dual containment of Iraq and
Iran as long as those states pose a threat to U.S. interests,
to other states in the region, and to their own Citizens.

We have made solid progress in the past year. The
President's efforts helped bring about an historic ﬁrst —— the
handshake of peace between Prime Minister Rabin and
Chairman Arafat on the White House lawn. The President
will bring Prime Minister Rabin and King Hussein to
Washington for an historic meeting to advance the peace
process further. But our efforts have not stopped there; on
other bilateral tracks and through regional dialogue we are
working to foster a durable peace and a comprehensive
settlement, while our support for economic development
can bring hope to all the peoples of the region.

In Southwest Asia, the United States will maintain its long-
standing presence, which has been centered on naval
vessels in and near the Persian Gulf and prepositioned
combat equipment. Since Operation Desert Storm, tempo-
rary deployments of land-based aviation forces, ground
forces and amphibious units have supplemented our
posture in the Gulf region.

While we hold out the hand of cooperation and assistance
to the nations of the region that choose peace, we are fi rm
in our determination to contain and resist those who foster
conflict. We have instituted a new dual containment
strategy aimed at both Iraq and Iran.

We have made clear to Iraq it must comply with all the
relevant Security Council resolutions. and we continue to
support oppressed minorities in Iraq through Operations
Provide Comfort and Southern Watch. Our policy is
directed not against the people of Iraq, but against its
oppressive and dangerous leaders.

Our policy toward Iran is aimed at changing the behavior
of the Iranian government in several key areas, including
Iran's efforts to obtain weapons of mass destruction and
missiles, its support for terrorism and groups that oppose
the peace process, its attempts to undermine friendly
governments in the region and its dismal human rights
record. We remain willing to enter into an authoritative
dialogue with Iran to discuss the differences between us.

 

South Asia has seen the spread of democracy, and our
strategy is designed to help the peoples of that region
enjoy the fruits of democracy and greater stability through
efforts aimed at resolving long-standing conflict and imple-

menting confidence building measures. This advances U.S.

interests in halting nuclear and ballistic missile prolifera-
tion. The United States has engaged India and Pakistan in
seeking agreement on steps to cap, reduce, and ultimately
eliminate their weapons of mass destruction and ballistic
missile capabilities. Regional stability and improved bilat-
eral ties are also important for America’s economic interest
in a region that contains a quarter of the world’s popula-
tion and one of its most important emerging markets.

A key objective of our policy in the Gulf is to reduce the
chances that another aggressor will emerge who would
threaten the independence of existing states. Therefore, we
will continue to encourage members of the Gulf
Cooperation Council to work closely on collective defense
and security arrangements, help individual GCC states
meet their appropriate defense requirements and maintain
our bilateral defense agreements.

In both the Middle East and Souﬂr Asia, the pressure of
expanding populations on natural resources is enormous.
Growing desertification in the Middle East has strained
relations over arable land. Pollution of the coastal areas in
the Eastern Mediterranean, the Red Sea, and the Gulf of
Aqaba has degraded ﬁsh catches and hindered develop-
ment. Water shortages stemming from overuse, contami-
nated water aquifers, and riparian disputes threaten
regional relations.

In South Asia, high population densities and rampant
pollution have exacted a tremendous toll on forests, biodi-
versity, and the local environment.

Africa

Africa is one of our greatest challenges for a strategy of
engagement and enlargement. Throughout Africa, the U.S.
policy seeks to help support democracy, sustainable
economic development and resolution of conﬂicts through
negotiation, diplomacy and peacekeeping. New policies
will focus on efforts to strengthen civil societies and mech-
anisms for conﬂict resolution, particularly where ethnic,
religious, and political tensions are acute. In particular, we

26

intend to focus on identifying and addressing the root
causes of conﬂicts and disasters before they erupt.

The nexus of economic, political, social, ethnic and envi-
ronmental challenges facing Africa can lead to a sense of
”Afro-pessimism." We will instead seek to simultaneously
address these challenges and create a synergy that can
stimulate development, resurrect societies and build hope.
Throughout the continent — in Rwanda, Burundi,
Mozambique, Angola, Liberia, Sudan -and elsewhere —
we encourage peaceful resolution of internal disputes to
promote long-term stability and development of the
region. We also encourage democratic reform in nations
like Nigeria and Zaire to allow the people of these coun-
tries to enjoy responsive government.

This year, South Africa took key steps towards democratic
reform with the holding of non-racial elections and
creation of a Government of National Unity. We will
remain committed to ensuring that democracy takes root
in South Africa in order to foster a new era of prosperity
and stability for all the peoples of the region. We must
support the revolution of democracy sweeping the conti-
nent—— on center stage in South Africa, and in quieter but
no less dramatic ways in countries like Malawi, Benin,
Niger and Mali. We need to encourage the creation of
cultures of tolerance, flowering of civil society and the
protection of human rights and human dignity.

Our humanitarian interventions, along with the interna-
tional community, will require continued active participa-
tion to address the grave circumstances on the continent.
This has been particularly true in Somalia. The global
reach of U.S. forces in Somalia allowed us to break
through the chaos that had prevented the introduction of
relief supplies and UN peacekeepers. U.S. forces
prevented the death of hundreds of thousands of Somalis,
established a logistics system and then turned over the
mission to more than 25,000 UN peacekeepers from over
a score of nations.

In the end, however, such efforts by the U.S. and the inter-
national community must be limited in duration and
designed to give the peoples of a nation the means and
opportunity to put their own house in order. ln Somalia
and elsewhere. the responsibility for the fate of a nation
rests finally with its own people. In Rwanda, the United
States has also taken an active role in providing relief to
those displaced by ethnic violence. And U.S. ND is

leading international efforts to get ahead of the curve on
potential famines that threaten up to 20 million people on
the continent.

The United States is also working with regional organiza-
tions, non-governmental organizations and governments
throughout Africa to address the urgent issues of popula-
tion growth, spreading disease (including AIDS), environ-
mental decline, enhancing the role of women in develop-
ment, eliminating support for terrorism, demobilization of
bioated militaries, relieving burdensome debt, and
expanding trade and investment ties to the countries of
Africa.

Central to all these efforts will be strengthening the
American constituency for Africa, drawing on the knowl-
edge, experience and commitment of millions of

Americans to enhance our nation's support for positive
change in Africa. The White House Conference on Africa,
the first such gathering of regional experts ever sponsored
by the White House, drew together more than 200
Americans from the Administration, Congress, business,
labor, academia, religious groups, relief and development
agencies, human rights groups and others to discuss
Africa's future and the role that the United States can play
in it. The President, Vice President, Secretary of State and
National Security Advisor all participated in the confer-
ence, which produced a wealth of new ideas and new
commitment to Africa.

27

IV. Conclusions

The clear and present dangers of the Cold War made the
need for national security commitments and expenditures
obvious to the American people. Today the task of mobi-
lizing public support for national security priorities has
become more complicated. The complex array of new
dangers, opportunities and responsibilities outlined in this
strategy come at a moment in our history when Americans
are preoccupied with domestic concerns and when
budgetary constraints are tighter than at any point in the
last half oentury. Yet, in an integrating and interdependent
world, we simply cannot be successful in advancing our
interests —— political, military and economic — without
active engagement in world affairs.

While Cold War threats have diminished, our nation can
never again isolate itself from global developments.
Domestic renewal will not succeed if we fail to engage
abroad in open foreign markets, to promote democracy in
key countries, and to counter and contain emerging
threats.

We are committed to enhancing U.S. national security in
the most efficient and effective ways possible. We recog-
nize that maintaining peace and ensuring our national
security in a volatile world are expensive. The cost of any
other course of action, however, would. be immeasurably
higher.

Our engagement abroad requires the active, sustained
bipartisan support of the American people and the U.S.
Congress. Of all the elements contained in this strategy,
none is more important than this: our Administration is
committed to explaining our security interests and objec- _
tives to the nation; to seeking the broadest possible public
and congressional support for our security programs and
investments; and to exerting our leadership in the world in
a manner that reflects our best national values and protects
the security of this great and good nation.

29

 

