 

A NATIONAL
SECURITY
STRATEGY
OF

ENGAGEMENT
AND

ENLARGEMENT

FEBRUARY T 995

A NATIONAL

SECURITY

STRATEGY

 

OF

ENGAGEMENT

AND

ENLARGEMENT

THE WHITE HOUSE
FEBRUARY 1995

CONTENTS

Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . i

Enhancing American Competitivenes§9
I. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . 1

Partnership with Business and Labdﬂ
II. Advancing Our Interests Through

Engagement and Enlargement . . . 7 Enhancing Access to Foreign Markeﬂ§
Enhancing Our Security . . . . . 8 The North American Free Trade
Maintaining a Strong Defense Agreement . . . . . . . . . 20
Capability . . . . . . . . . 8
Asia—Pacific Economic
Major Regional Contingencies 9 Cooperation . . . . . . . . 20
Uruguay Round of GATT . . . 20
Overseas Presence . . . . . . 9
U.S. — Japan Framework
Counterterrorism, Fighting Drug Agreement . . . . . . . . . 20
Trafficking and Other Missions1O
Summit of the Americas . . 20
Combating Terrorism . . . 10
Expanding the Realm of Free
Fighting Drug Trafficking 11 Trade . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Other Missions . . . . . 11 Strengthening Macroeconomic
Coordination . . . . . . . . . 21
Deciding When and How to Employ
U.S. Forces . . . . . . . . 12 Providing for Energy Security . 21
Combating the Spread and Use of Promoting Sustainable Development
Weapons of Mass Destruction and Abroad . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Missiles . . . . . . . . . 13
Promoting Democracy . . . . . . 22
Nonproliferation and
Counterproliferation . . 13 III. Integrated Regional Approaches 25
Nuclear Forces . . . . . 15 Europe and Eurasia . . . . . . 25
Arms Control . . . . . . . . 15 East Asian and the Pacific . . 28
Peace Operations . . . . . . 16 The Western Hemisphere . . . . 29
Strong Intelligence Capabilitie§7 The Middle East, Southwest and
South Asia . . . . . . . . . . 30
The Environment and Sustainable
Development . . . . . . . . 18 Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . 31

Promoting Prosperity at Home . 19 IV. Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . 33

PREFACE

Protecting our nation's security — our
people, our territory and our way of
life — is my Administration's foremost
mission and constitutional duty. The
end of the Cold War fundamentally
changed America's security imperatives.
The central security challenge of the
past half century — the threat of
communist expansion — is gone. The
dangers we face today are more diverse.
Ethnic conflict is spreading and rogue
states pose a serious danger to
regional stability in many corners of
the globe. The proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction represents
a major challenge to our security.
Large scale environmental degradation,
exacerbated by rapid population growth,
threatens to undermine political
stability in many countries and
regions.

At the same time, we have unparalleled
opportunities to make our nation safer
and more prosperous. Our military
might is unparalleled. We now have a
truly global economy linked by an
instantaneous communications network,
which offers growing opportunity for
American jobs and American investment.
The community of democratic nations is
growing, enhancing the prospects for
political stability, peaceful conflict
resolution and greater dignity and hope
for the people of the world. The
international community is beginning to
act together to address pressing global
environmental needs.

Never has American leadership been more
essential — to navigate the shoals of
the world's new dangers and to
capitalize on its opportunities.
American assets are unique: our
military strength, our dynamic economy,
our powerful ideals and, above all, our
people. We can and must make the
difference through our engagement; but
our involvement must be carefully
tailored to serve our interests and
priorities.

This report, submitted in accordance
with Section 603 of the Goldwater—
Nichols Defense Department
Reorganization Act of 1986, elaborates
a national security strategy tailored
for this new era. Focusing on new
threats and new opportunities, its
central goals are:

o To sustain our security with
military forces that are ready to
fight.

0 To bolster America's economic
revitalization.

0 To promote democracy abroad.

Over the past two years, my
Administration has worked diligently to
pursue these goals. This national
security strategy report presents the
strategy that has guided this effort.
It is premised on a belief that the
line between our domestic and foreign
policies is disappearing — that we must
revitalize our economy if we are to
sustain our military forces, foreign
initiatives and global influence, and
that we must engage actively abroad if
we are to open foreign markets and
create jobs for our people.

We believe that our goals of enhancing
our security, bolstering our economic
prosperity, and promoting democracy are
mutually supportive. Secure nations
are more likely to support free trade
and maintain democratic structures.
Nations with growing economies and
strong trade ties are more likely to
feel secure and to work toward freedom.
And democratic states are less likely
to threaten our interests and more
likely to cooperate with the U.S. to
meet security threats and promote free
trade and sustainable development.

Since my Administration began, we have been
deeply engaged in adapting existing
structures, and in constructing new ones, to
meet these goals. To enhance global
security, for example, we have pursued peace
initiatives in the Middle East; established
NATO's Partnership for Peace and initiated a
process that will lead to NATO's expansion;
secured the accession of Ukraine,
Kazakhstan, and Belarus to the Nuclear
Non—Proliferation Treaty and their agreement
to eliminate nuclear weapons from their
territory, which in turn opened the door to
the ratification and entry into force of the
START I Treaty; participated in an
unprecedented regional security gathering of
the ASEAN countries and others, including
Russia and Vietnam; and reached an agreed
framework with North Korea that halted, and
will eventually eliminate, its dangerous
nuclear program. To bolster prosperity at
home and around the world, we have secured
the enactment of legislation implementing
both the North American Free Trade Agreement
(NAFTA) and the Uruguay Round of the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT),
worked to open Asian—Pacific markets through
two leaders meetings of the Asia—Pacific
Economic Cooperation forum, lowered export
controls and held a Western Hemisphere
Summit in Miami where the 34 democratic
nations of this hemisphere committed
themselves to negotiate a free trade
agreement by 2005. To promote democracy, we
have supported South Africa's recent
transformation, provided aid to a new
democratic Russia and other new independent
states as well as Central and Eastern
European nations, assisted Cambodia, and
worked with our Western Hemisphere neighbors
restoring the democratically elected
government in Haiti and hosting the Summit
of the Americas, which reaffirmed and
strengthened our mutual commitment to
democracy.

Our extraordinary diplomatic leverage to
reshape existing security and economic
structures and create new ones ultimately
relies upon American power. Our economic
and military might, as well as the power of
our ideals, make America's diplomats the

first among equals. Our economic strength
gives us a position of advantage on almost
every global issue. For instance, South

Africa and our negotiations with North Korea
demonstrate how economic incentives and the
imposition — or the threat — of economic
sanctions enable us to achieve our
objectives as part of our determined
diplomacy.

But military force remains an indispensable

element of our nation's power. Even with
the Cold War over, our nation must maintain

ii

military forces sufficient to deter diverse
threats and, when necessary, to fight and
win against our adversaries. While many
factors ultimately contribute to our
nation's safety and well—being, no single
component is more important than the men and
women who wear America's uniform and stand
sentry over our security. Their skill,
service and dedication constitute the core
of our defenses. Today our military is the
best—equipped, best trained and
best—prepared fighting force in the world.
Time after time in the last year, our troops
demonstrated their current readiness and
strength: helping to save hundreds of
thousands of lives in Rwanda; moving with
lightning speed to head off another Iraqi
threat to Kuwait; and giving freedom and
democracy back to the people of Haiti. I am
committed to ensuring that this military
capability is not compromised.

The United States recognizes that we have a
special responsibility that goes along with
being a great power. Our global interests
and our historic ideals impel us to oppose
those who would endanger the survival or
well— being of their peaceful neighbors.
Nations should be able to expect that their
borders and their sovereignty will always be
secure. At the same time, this does not
mean we or the international community must
tolerate gross violations of human rights
within those borders.

When our national security interests are
threatened, we will, as America always has,
use diplomacy when we can, but force if we
must. We will act with others when we can,
but alone when we must. We recognize,
however, that while force can defeat an
aggressor, it cannot solve underlying
problems. Democracy and economic prosperity
can take root in a struggling society only
through local solutions carried out by the
society itself. We must use military force
selectively, recognizing that its use may do
no more than provide a window of opportunity
for a society — and diplomacy — to work.

We therefore will send American troops
abroad only when our interests and our
values are sufficiently at stake. When we
do so, it will be with clear objectives to
which we are firmly committed and which —
when combat is likely — we have the means to
achieve decisively. To do otherwise, risks
those objectives and endangers our troops.
These requirements are as pertinent for
humanitarian and other non—traditional
interventions today as they were for
previous generations during prolonged world
wars. Modern media communications may now
bring to our homes both the suffering that
exists in many parts of the world and the
casualties that may accompany interven—

tion to help. But we must remain clear
in our purpose and resolute in its
execution. And while we must continue
to reassess the costs and benefits of
any operation as it unfolds, reflexive
calls for withdrawal of our forces when
casualties are incurred would simply
encourage rogue actors to try to force
our departure from areas where there
are U.S. interests by attacking
American troops.

During the past two years, diplomacy
backed by American power has produced
results:

0 When Iraq moved forces towards Kuwait,
we reacted swiftly and dispatched
large—scale forces to the region under
the authority of the United Nations—but
were prepared to act alone, if
necessary.

0 In Haiti, it was only when the Haitian
military learned that the 82nd Airborne
Division was enroute that we achieved
peacefully what we were prepared to do
under fire.

0 In Bosnia, we have been able to achieve
limited but important objectives when
diplomacy has been married to
appropriate military power. For
instance, the Sarajevo ultimatum largely
succeeded because the threat of NATO air
power was judged real; similarly, the
threat of NATO airpower prevented the
fall of Gorazde.

o In Rwanda and Somalia, only the American
military could have done what it did in
these humanitarian missions, saving
hundreds of thousands of lives.
However, over the longer run our
interests were served by turning these
operations over to multilateral
peacekeeping forces once the immediate
humanitarian crisis was addressed. No
outside force can create a stable and
legitimate domestic order for another
society—that work can only be
accomplished by the society itself.

Our national security strategy reflects
both America's interests and our
values. Our commitment to freedom,
equality and human dignity continues to
serve as a beacon of hope to peoples
around the world. The vitality,
creativity and diversity of American

society are important sources of
national strength in a global economy
increasingly driven by information and
ideas.

Our prospects in this new era are
promising. The specter of nuclear
annihilation has dramatically receded.
The historic events of the past two
years — including the hand shake
between Israel and the PLO, the peace
treaty between Israel and Jordan, and
the transformation of South Africa to a
multiracial democracy headed by
President Mandela — suggest this era's
possibilities for achieving security,
prosperity and democracy.

Our nation can only address this era's
dangers and opportunities if we remain
actively engaged in global affairs. We
are the world's greatest power, and we
have global interests as well as
responsibilities. As our nation
learned after World War I, we can find
no security for America in isolationism
nor prosperity in protectionism. For
the American people to be safer and
enjoy expanding opportunities, our
nation must work to deter would—be
aggressors, open foreign markets,
promote the spread of democracy abroad,
encourage sustainable development and
pursue new opportunities for peace.

Our national security requires the
patient application of American will
and resources. We can only sustain
that necessary investment with the
broad, bipartisan support of the
American people and their
representatives in Congress. The full
participation of Congress is essential
to the success of our new engagement,
and I will consult with members of
Congress at every step in making and
implementing American foreign policy.
The Cold War may be over, but the need
for American leadership abroad remains
as strong as ever. I am committed to
forging a new public consensus to
sustain our active engagement abroad in
pursuit of our cherished goal — a more
secure world where democracy and free
markets know no borders. This document
details that commitment.

WILLIAM J. CLINTON

iii

iv

I . INTRODUCTION

A new era is upon us. The Cold War is
over. The dissolution of the Soviet
empire has radically transformed the
security environment facing the United
States and our allies. The primary
security imperative of the past half
century — containing communist
expansion while preventing nuclear war
— is gone. We no longer face massive
Soviet forces across an East—West
divide nor Soviet missiles targeted on
the United States. Yet there remains a
complex array of new and old security
challenges America must meet as we
approach a new century.

This national security strategy
assesses America's role in this new
international context and describes the
Administration's strategy to advance
our interests at home and abroad.

This is a period of great promise but
also great uncertainty. We stand as
the world's preeminent power.

America's core value of freedom, as
embodied in democratic governance and
market economics, has gained ground
around the world. Hundreds of millions
of people have thrown off communism,
dictatorship or apartheid. Former
adversaries now cooperate with us in
diplomacy and global problem solving.
Both the threat of a war among great
powers and the specter of nuclear
annihilation have receded dramatically.
The dynamism of the global economy is
transforming commerce, culture and
global politics, promising greater
prosperity for America and greater
cooperation among nations.

At the same time, troubling
uncertainties and clear threats remain.
The new, independent states that
replaced the

Soviet Union are experiencing wrenching
economic and political transitions, as
are many new democracies of Central and
Eastern Europe. While our relations
with the other great powers are as
constructive as at any point in this
century, Russia's historic transfor—
mation will proceed along a difficult
path, and China maintains a repressive
regime even as that country assumes a
more important economic and political
role in global affairs. The spread of
weapons of mass destruction poses
serious threats. Violent extremists
threaten fragile peace processes in
many parts of the world. Worldwide,
there is a resurgence of militant
nationalism as well as ethnic and
religious conflict. This has been
demonstrated by upheavals in Bosnia,
Rwanda and Somalia, where the United
States has participated in peacekeeping
and humanitarian missions.

Not all security risks are immediate or
military in nature. Transnational
phenomena such as terrorism, narcotics
trafficking, environmental degradation,
natural resource depletion, rapid
population growth and refugee flows
also have security implications for
both present and long term American
policy. In addition, an emerging class
of transnational environmental issues
are increasingly affecting interna—
tional stability and consequently will
present new challenges to U.S. strategy.

American leadership in the world has
never been more important, for there is
a simple truth about this new world:
the same idea that was under attack
three times in this Century — first by
imperialism and then by fascism and
communism — remains under attack today,
but on many

fronts at once. It is an idea that comes
under many names — democracy, liberty,
civility, pluralism — but which together are
the values of a society where leaders and
governments preserve individual freedoms,
and ensure opportunity and human dignity.

As the President has said, "We face a

contest as old as history — a struggle
between freedom and tyranny; between
tolerance and isolation. It is a fight

between those who would build free societies
governed by laws and those who would impose
their will by force. Our struggle today, in
a world more high—tech, more fast—moving,
more chaotically diverse than ever, is the
age—old fight between hope and fear."

The victors of World War I squandered their
triumph in this age—old struggle when they
turned inward, bringing on a global
depression and allowing fascism to rise, and
reigniting global war. After World War II,
we learned the lessons of the past. In the
face of a new totalitarian threat this great
nation did not walk away from the challenge

of the moment. Instead it chose to reach
out, to rebuild international security
structures and to lead. This determination

of previous generations to prevail over
communism by shaping new international
structures left us a world stronger, safer
and freer. It is this example and its
success which now inspire us to begin the
difficult task of a new stage in this old
struggle: to secure the peace won in the
Cold War against those who would still deny
people their human rights, terrorists who
threaten innocents and pariah states who
choose repression and extremism over
openness and moderation.

If we exert our leadership abroad, we can
make America safer and more prosperous — by
deterring aggression, by fostering the
peaceful resolution of dangerous conflicts,
by opening foreign markets, by helping
democratic regimes and by tackling global
problems. Without our active leadership and
engagement abroad, threats will fester and
our opportunities will narrow.

We must seek to be as creative and
constructive — in the literal sense of that
word — as the generation of the late 1940's.
For all its dangers, this new world presents
an immense opportunity — the chance to adapt
and construct global institutions that will
help to provide security and increase
economic growth throughout the world.

The issue for the next decade is whether our
efforts at this construction can succeed in
the face of shifting threats to the ideals
and habits of democracy. It is therefore in
our

interest that democracy be at once the
foundation and the purpose of the
international structures we build through
this constructive diplomacy: the foundation,
because the institutions will be a
reflection of their shared values and norms;
the purpose, because if our economic
institutions are secure, democracy will
flourish.

While democracy will not soon take hold
everywhere, we know that the larger the pool
of democracies, the better off we, and the
entire community of nations, will be.
Democracies create free markets that offer
economic opportunity, make for more reliable
trading partners, and are far less likely to
wage war on one another. It is in our
interest to do all that we can to enlarge
the community of free and open societies,
especially in areas of greatest strategic
interest, as in the former Soviet Union.

We can only engage actively abroad if the
American people and the Congress are willing
to bear the costs of that leadership — in
dollars, political energy and, at times,
American lives. In a democracy, the foreign
policy of the nation must serve the needs of
the people. The preamble of the
Constitution sets out the basic objectives:

to provide for the common defense,
promote the general welfare, and secure
the blessings of liberty to ourselves
and our posterity.

The end of the Cold War does not alter these
fundamental purposes. Nor does it reduce
the need for active American efforts, here
and abroad, to pursue those goals. One
purpose of this report is to help foster the
broad, bipartisan understanding and support
necessary to sustain our international
engagement. A coalition of the center
through bipartisan congressional
participation is critical to this
commitment.

Our national security strategy is based on
enlarging the community of market
democracies while deterring and containing a
range of threats to our nation, our allies
and our interests. The more that democracy
and political and economic liberalization
take hold in the world, particularly in
countries of geostrategic importance to us,
the safer our nation is likely to be and the
more our people are likely to prosper.

To that broad end, the report explains the
three central components of our strategy of
engagement and enlargement: our efforts to
enhance our security by maintaining a

strong defense capability and promoting
cooperative security measures; our work to
open foreign markets and spur global
economic growth; and our promotion of
democracy abroad. It also explains how we
are pursuing the three elements of our
strategy in specific regions by adapting and
constructing institutions that will help to
provide security and increase economic
growth throughout the world.

During the first two years of this
Administration, this strategy already has
produced tangible results with respect to
our security requirements:

O

At the President's direction, the
Pentagon completed the Bottom Up Review,
a full—scale assessment of what defense
forces and systems our nation needs for
this new security era. The President
has also set forth a defense budget for
Fiscal Years 1996—2001 that funds the
force structure recommended by the
Review, and he repeatedly stressed that
he will draw the line against further
cuts that would undermine that force
structure or erode U.S. military
readiness. The swift and efficient
deployment of our forces last October to
the Persian Gulf, and to Haiti and
Rwanda, clearly demonstrates their
continued readiness to respond as
needed. The President also requested
Congress to enact supplemental appro—
priations of $1.7 billion for FY 1994
and $2.6 billion for FY 1995 to ensure
training readiness is not impaired by
the costs of such unanticipated contin—
gencies. In addition, the President
added $25 billion to the defense
spending plan over the next six years to
provide more funding for readiness and
to improve the quality of life of our
military personnel and families.

At President Clinton's initiative, a
NATO Summit in January 1994 approved the
Partnership For Peace (PFP) and
initiated a process that will lead to
NATO's gradual expansion to ensure that
NATO is prepared to meet the European
and trans—Atlantic security challenges
of this era, and to provide the security
relationships that will provide the
underpinnings for the democratic gains
in Europe since 1989. Since the Summit,
25 countries, including Russia, agreed
to join the Partnership for Peace.

The United States, Russia, Ukraine,
Belarus and Kazakhstan exchanged
instruments of ratification for the
START I Treaty at the December summit of
the Conference on Security and
Cooperation in Europe

(CSCE), culminating two years of inten—
sive U.S. diplomatic efforts to bring
the Treaty into force and paving the way
for ratification of the START II Treaty.
START I requires the permanent elimi—
nation of bombers, ICBM silos and bal—
listic missile submarine launch tubes
that carried over 9,000 of the 21,000
total warheads the United States and the
former Soviet Union declared when the
Treaty was signed — a reduction of 40
percent. START II, signed in 1993, will
eliminate additional U.S. and Russian
strategic launchers and will effectively
remove an additional 5,000 warheads,
leaving each side with no more than
3,500. These actions will reduce the
strategic force arsenals of the United
States and Russia by two—thirds. Pre—
sidents Clinton and Yeltsin have agreed
that once START II is ratified, the
United States and Russia will begin
immediately to deactivate all strategic
nuclear delivery systems to be reduced
under the Treaty by removing their
nuclear warheads or taking other steps
to take them out of combat status, thus
removing thousands of warheads from
alert status years ahead of schedule.
The two Presidents also directed an
intensification of dialogue regarding
the possibility of further reductions
of, and limitations on, remaining
nuclear forces.

The President launched a comprehensive
policy to combat the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and the
missiles that deliver them. The United
States has secured landmark commitments
to eliminate all nuclear weapons from
Ukraine, Belarus and Kazakhstan and, in
December, all three nations formally
acceded to the Nuclear Non—proliferation
Treaty as non—nuclear weapon states.
The United States and over 30 other
nations opened formal negotiations on a
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty in January
1994, producing a Joint Draft Treaty
text that provides a baseline for
resolving remaining issues. We also
made significant progress during the
past year in negotiations within the
Anti—Ballistic Missile (ABM) Treaty's
Standing Consultative Commission (SCC)
to establish an agreed demarcation
between strategic and theater ballistic
missiles that will allow for the
deployment of advanced theater missile
defense and update the ABM treaty to
reflect the break—up of the Soviet
Union. The Administration also sub—
mitted the Chemical Weapons Convention
to the Senate for ratification and
supported the development of new
measures to strengthen the Biological
Weapons Convention.

The Administration reached an important
agreed framework with North Korea that
has halted, and will eventually
eliminate, that country's nuclear
program, greatly enhancing regional
stability and achieving our
nonproliferation goals. The
Administration also reached agreements
with Russia, Ukraine and South Africa to
control missile—related technology and
secured China's commitment not to
transfer MTCR—controlled
ground—to—ground missiles.

The President's efforts helped bring
about many historic firsts in the Middle
East peace process — the handshake of
peace between Prime Minister Rabin and
Chairman Arafat on the White House lawn
has been followed by the Jordan—Israel
peace treaty, progress on eliminating
the Arab boycott of Israel and the
establishment of ties between Israel and
an increasing number of its Arab
neighbors.

On May 3, 1994, President Clinton signed
a Presidential Decision Directive
establishing "U.S. Policy on Reforming
Multilateral Peace Operations." This
policy represents the first,
comprehensive framework for U.S.
decisionmaking on issues of peacekeeping
and peace enforcement suited to the
realities of the post Cold War period.

In October 1994, President Clinton
submitted the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea to the Senate for
ratification. This was the culmination
of years of negotiations to ensure an
equitable balance between the rights of
coastal states to control activities in
adjacent offshore areas to protect their
economic, security and environmental
interests, and the rights of maritime
states to free and unimpeded navigation
and overflight of the oceans of the
world. This included an acceptable
regime to administer the mineral
resources of the deep seabed, thereby
protecting U.S. interests.

On the economic front, Administration
policies have created nearly six million
American jobs and established the foundation
for the global economy of the 21st Century:

O

The President worked with the Congress
on effective measures to reduce the
federal budget deficit and restore
economic growth. These measures help
increase our competitiveness and
strengthen our position in negotiations
with other nations.

The President secured approval of the
North American Free Trade Agreement
(NAFTA) which creates the world's
largest free trade zone and has already
created more than 100,000 American jobs.
The vote for NAFTA marked a decisive
U.S. affirmation of its international
engagement. Through NAFTA's
environmental and labor side agreements,
we are working actively to protect the
rights of workers and to reduce air and
water pollution that crosses national
boundaries. When Mexico came under
short—term financial pressures in
December of 1994, the United States took
the lead in marshaling international
support to assist the country in meeting
this challenge. This decision reflected
the President's belief that the United
States has a strong interest in
prosperity and stability in Mexico and
that it is in our economic and strategic
interest that Mexico's economic reform
program succeeds.

The Administration stood at the
forefront of a multilateral effort to
achieve history's most extensive
market—opening agreements in the GATT
Uruguay—round negotiations on world
trade. Working with a bipartisan
coalition in the Congress, the President
secured approval of this path breaking
agreement and the resulting World Trade
Organization, which will add $100—200
billion and hundreds of thousands of
jobs each year to the U.S. economy.

The President convened the first meeting
of leaders of the Asia— Pacific Economic
Cooperation (APEC) forum — and took
steps to expand our ties with the
economies of the Asia—Pacific region,
the fastest growing area in the world.
At their second meeting in November
1994, the APEC leaders agreed to the
goal of free trade within the region by
early in the 21st Century and to develop
a blueprint for implementation by the
APEC meeting this year in Osaka.

The President hosted the Summit of the
Americas in December, a historic
gathering where the 34 democratic
nations of the hemisphere committed
themselves to completing negotiations on
a regional free trade agreement by 2005.
In Miami, the United States, Canada and
Mexico also invited Chile to begin
negotiations to join NAFTA.

We have committed the United States to
reduce its greenhouse gas emissions to
1990 levels by the year

2000, and we have developed a National
Climate Plan to achieve that goal. The
United States has also taken a leading
role at the international level towards
phasing out the production of most
ozone—depleting substances. Under the
Montreal Protocol for the protection of
the ozone layer, the United States is
contributing to developing countries‘
efforts to reduce their emissions of
ozone—depleting chemicals. In June
1993, the U.S. signed the Biodiversity
Treaty, and one year later, the
Desertification Convention.

The Administration has asserted world
leadership on population issues. We
played a key role during the Cairo
Conference on Population and Development
in developing a consensus Program of
Action, including increased availability
of voluntary family planning and
reproductive health services,
sustainable economic development,
strengthening of family ties, the
empowerment of women including enhanced
educational opportunities, and a
reduction in infant and child mortality
through immunizations and other
programs.

Finally, the President has demonstrated a
firm commitment to expanding the global
realm of democracy:

O

The Administration substantially
expanded U.S. support for democratic and
market reform in Russia, Ukraine and the
other newly independent states of the
former Soviet Union, including a
comprehensive assistance package for
Ukraine.

The United States launched a series of
initiatives to bolster the new
democracies of Central and Eastern
Europe, including the White House Trade
and Investment Conference for Central
and Eastern Europe held in Cleveland in
January. We affirmed our concern for
their security and market economic
transformation, recognizing that such
assurances would play a key role in
promoting democratic developments.

Working with the international community
under the auspices of the UN, we
succeeded in reversing the coup in Haiti
and restoring the democratically elected
president and government. We are now
helping the Haitian people consolidate
their hardwon democracy and rebuild
their country as we complete the
transition from the Multinational Force
to the United Nations Mission in Haiti.

0 U.S. engagement in Northern Ireland
contributed to the establishment of a
cease—fire, first by the IRA and
subsequently by loyalist
para—militaries. The President
announced in November a package of
initiatives aimed at consolidating the
peace by promoting economic
revitalization and increased private
sector trade and investment in Northern
Ireland.

0 At the Summit of the Americas, the 34
democratic nations of the hemisphere
agreed to a detailed plan of cooperative
action in such diverse fields as health,
education, counter—narcotics,
environmental protection, information
infrastructure, and the strengthening
and safeguarding of democratic
institutions, in addition to mutual
prosperity and sustainable development.
The Summit ushered in a new era of
hemispheric cooperation that would not
have been possible without U.S.
leadership and commitment.

o The United States has increased support
for South Africa as it conducted
elections and became a multiracial
democracy. During the state visit of
Nelson Mandela in October, we announced
formation of a bilateral commission to
foster new cooperation between our
nations, and an assistance package to
support housing, health, education,
trade and investment.

0 The United States, working with the
Organization of American States, helped
reverse an anti—democratic coup in
Guatemala.

0 In Mozambique and Angola, the United
States played a leading role in
galvanizing the international community
to help bring an end to two decades of
civil war and to promote national
reconciliation. For the first time,
there is the prospect that all of
southern Africa will enjoy the fruits of
peace and prosperity.

o The Administration initiated policies
aimed at crisis prevention, including a
new peacekeeping policy.

This report has two major sections. The
first part of the report explains our
strategy of engagement and enlargement. The
second part describes briefly how the
Administration is applying this strategy to
the world's major regions.

II. ADVANCING OUR INTERESTS THROUGH

ENGAGEMENT AND ENLARGEMENT

The dawn of the post—Cold War era presents
the United States with many distinct
dangers, but also with a generally improved
security environment and a range of
opportunities to improve it further. The
unitary threat that dominated our engagement
during the Cold War has been replaced by a
complex set of challenges. Our nation's
strategy for defining and addressing those
challenges has several core principles which
guide our policy. First and foremost, we
must exercise global leadership. We are not
the world's policeman, but as the world's
premier economic and military power, and
with the strength of our democratic values,
the U.S. is indispensable to the forging of
stable political relations and open trade.

Our leadership must stress preventive
diplomacy — through such means as support
for democracy, economic assistance, overseas
military presence, military—to—military
contacts and involvement in multilateral
negotiations in the Middle East and
elsewhere — in order to help resolve
problems, reduce tensions and defuse
conflicts before they become crises. These
measures are a wise investment in our
national security because they offer the
prospect of resolving problems with the
least human and material cost.

Our engagement must be selective, focusing
on the challenges that are most relevant to
our own interests and focusing our resources
where we can make the most difference. We
must also use the right tools — being
willing to act unilaterally when our direct
national interests are most at stake; in
alliance and partnership when our interests
are shared by others; and multilaterally
when our interests are more general and the
problems are best addressed by the
international community. In all cases, the
nature of our response must depend on what
best serves our own long—term national
interests. Those interests are

ultimately defined by our security
requirements. Such requirements start with
our physical defense and economic
well—being. They also include environmental
security as well as the security of values
achieved through expansion of the community
of democratic nations.

Our national security strategy draws upon a
range of political, military and economic
instruments, and focuses on the primary
objectives that President Clinton has
stressed throughout his Administration:

o Enhancing Our Security. Taking account
of the realities of the post—Cold War
era and the new threats, a military
capability appropriately sized and
postured to meet the diverse needs of
our strategy, including the ability, in
concert with regional allies, to win two
nearly simultaneous major regional
conflicts. We will continue to pursue
arms control agreements to reduce the
danger of nuclear, chemical, biological,
and conventional conflict and to promote
stability.

o Promoting Prosperity at Home. A
vigorous and integrated economic policy
designed to stimulate global
environmentally sound economic growth
and free trade and to press for open and
equal U.S. access to foreign markets.

o Promoting Democracy. A framework of
democratic enlargement that increases
our security by protecting,
consolidating and enlarging the
community of free market democracies.
Our efforts focus on strengthening
democratic processes in key emerging
democratic states including Russia,
Ukraine and other new states of the
former Soviet Union.

These basic objectives of our national
security strategy will guide the allocation
of our scarce national security resources.
Because deficit reduction is also central to
the long—term health and competitiveness of
the American economy, we have made it, along
with efficient and environmentally sound use
of our resources, a major priority. Under
the Clinton economic plan, the deficit will
be reduced over 700 billion dollars by
Fiscal Year 1998. President Clinton has
also lowered the deficit as a percentage of
the Gross Domestic Product from 4.9 percent
in Fiscal Year 1992 to 2.4 percent in Fiscal
Year 1995—the lowest since 1979.

Enhancing our Security

The U.S. government is responsible for
protecting the lives and personal safety of
Americans, maintaining our political freedom
and independence as a nation and promoting
the well—being and prosperity of our nation.
No matter how powerful we are as a nation,
we cannot secure these basic goals
unilaterally. Whether the problem is
nuclear proliferation, regional instability,
the reversal of reform in the former Soviet
empire or unfair trade practices, the
threats and challenges we face demand
cooperative, multinational solutions.
Therefore, the only responsible U.S.
strategy is one that seeks to ensure U.S.
influence over and participation in
collective decisionmaking in a wide and
growing range of circumstances.

An important element of our security
preparedness depends on durable
relationships with allies and other friendly
nations. Accordingly, a central thrust of
our strategy of engagement is to sustain and
adapt the security relationships we have
with key nations around the world. These
ties constitute an important part of an
international framework that will be
essential to ensuring cooperation across a
broad range of issues. Within the realm of
security issues, our cooperation with allies
includes such activities as: conducting
combined training and exercises,
coordinating military plans and
preparations, sharing intelligence, jointly
developing new systems and controlling
exports of sensitive technologies according
to common standards.

The post—Cold War era presents a different
set of threats to our security. In this new
period, enhancing American security
requires, first and foremost, developing and
maintaining a strong defense capability of
forces ready to fight.

We are developing integrated approaches for
dealing with threats arising from the
development of nuclear and other weapons of
mass destruction by other nations. Our
security requires a vigorous arms control
effort and a strong intelligence capability.
We have implemented a strategy for
multilateral peace operations. We have
clarified rigorous guidelines for when and
how to use military force in this era.

We also face security risks that are not
solely military in nature. Transnational
phenomena such as terrorism, narcotics
trafficking, and refugee flows also have
security implications both for present and
long term American policy. An emerging
class of transnational environmental and
natural resource issues is increasingly
affecting international stability and
consequently will present new challenges to
U.S. strategy. The threat of intrusions to
our military and commercial information
systems poses a significant risk to national
security and must be addressed.

Maintaining a Strong Defense
Capability

U.S. military capabilities are critical to
the success of our strategy. This nation
has unparalleled military capabilities: the
United States is the only nation capable of
conducting large—scale and effective
military operations far beyond its borders.
This fact, coupled with our unique position
as the security partner of choice in many
regions, provides a foundation for regional
stability through mutually beneficial
security partnerships. Our willingness and
ability to play a leading role in defending
common interests also help ensure that the
United States will remain an influential
voice in international affairs — political,
military and economic — that affect our
well—being, so long as we retain the
military wherewithal to underwrite our
commitments credibly.

To protect and advance U.S. interests in the
face of the dangers and opportunities
outlined earlier, the United States must
deploy robust and flexible military forces
that can accomplish a variety of tasks:

o Deterring and Defeating Aggression in
Major Regional Conflicts. Our forces
must be able to help offset the military
power of regional states with interests
opposed to those of the United States
and its allies. To do this, we must be
able to credibly deter and defeat
aggression, by projecting and sustaining
U.S. power in more than one region if
necessary.

o Providing a Credible Overseas Presence.
U.S. forces must also be forward
deployed or stationed in key overseas
regions in peacetime to deter aggression
and advance U.S. strategic interests.
Such overseas presence demonstrates our
commitment to allies and friends,
underwrites regional stability, gains us
familiarity with overseas operating
environments, promotes combined training
among the forces of friendly countries
and provides timely initial response
capabilities.

o Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction.
We are devoting greater efforts to
stemming the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and their delivery
means, but at the same time we must
improve our capabilities to deter and
prevent the use of such weapons and
protect ourselves against their effects.

o Contributing to Multilateral Peace
Operations. When our interests call for
it, the United States must also be
prepared to participate in multilateral
efforts to resolve regional conflicts
and bolster new democratic governments.
Thus, our forces must be ready to
participate in peacekeeping, peace
enforcement and other operations in
support of these objectives.

o Supporting Counterterrorism Efforts and
Other National Security Objectives. A
number of other tasks remain that U.S.
forces have typically carried out with
both general purpose and specialized
units. These missions include:
counterterrorism and punitive attacks,
noncombatant evacuation,
counternarcotics operations, special
forces assistance to nations and
humanitarian and disaster relief
operations.

To meet all of these requirements
successfully, our forces must be capable of
responding quickly and operating
effectively. That is, they must be ready to
fight and win. This imperative demands
highly qualified and motivated people;
modern, well—maintained equipment; realistic
training; strategic mobility; sufficient
support and sustainment capabilities, and
proper investment in science and technology.

Major Regional Contingencies
The focus of our planning for major theater

conflict is on deterring and, if necessary,
fighting and defeating aggres—

sion by potentially hostile regional powers,
such as North Korea, Iran or Iraq. Such
states are capable of fielding sizable
military forces that can cause serious
imbalances in military power within regions
important to the United States, with allied
or friendly states often finding it
difficult to match the power of a
potentially aggressive neighbor. To deter
aggression, prevent coercion of allied or
friendly governments and, ultimately, defeat
aggression should it occur, we must prepare
our forces to confront this scale of threat,
preferably in concert with our allies and
friends, but unilaterally if necessary. To
do this, we must have forces that can deploy
quickly and supplement U.S. forward based
and forward deployed forces, along with
regional allies, in halting an invasion and
defeating the aggressor, just as we
demonstrated by our rapid response in
October 1994 when Iraq threatened aggression
against Kuwait.

With programmed enhancements, the forces the
Administration is fielding will be
sufficient to help defeat aggression in two
nearly simultaneous major regional
conflicts. As a nation with global
interests, it is important that the United
States maintain forces with aggregate
capabilities on this scale. Obviously, we
seek to avoid a situation in which an
aggressor in one region might be tempted to
take advantage when U.S. forces are heavily
committed elsewhere. More basically,
maintaining a "two war" force helps ensure
that the United States will have sufficient
military capabilities to deter or defeat
aggression by a coalition of hostile powers
or by a larger, more capable adversary than
we foresee today.

We will never know with certainty how an
enemy might fight or precisely what demands
might be placed on our own forces in the
future. The contributions of allies or
coalition partners will vary from place to
place and over time. Thus, balanced U.S.
forces are needed in order to provide a wide
range of complementary capabilities and to
cope with the unpredictable and unexpected.

Overseas Presence

The need to deploy U.S. military forces
abroad in peacetime is also an important
factor in determining our overall force
structure. We will maintain robust overseas
presence in several forms, such as
permanently stationed forces and
prepositioned equipment, deployments and
combined exercises, port calls and other
force visits, as well as military—to—
military contacts. These activities provide
several benefits. Specifically they:

0 Gave form and substance to our bilateral
and multilateral security commitments.

0 Demonstrate our determination to defend
U.S. and allied interests in critical
regions, deterring hostile nations from
acting contrary to those interests.

0 Provide forward elements for rapid
response in crises as well as the bases,
ports and other infrastructure essential
for deployment of U.S.—based forces by
air, sea and land.

0 Enhance the effectiveness of coalition
operations, including peace operations,
by improving our ability to operate with
other nations.

0 Allow the United States to use its
position of trust to prevent the
development of power vacuums and
dangerous arms races, thereby
underwriting regional stability by
precluding threats to regional security.

0 Facilitate regional integration, since
nations that may not be willing to work
together in our absence may be willing
to coalesce around us in a crisis.

0 Promote an international security
environment of trust, cooperation, peace
and stability, which is fundamental to
the vitality of developing democracies
and free market economies for America's
own economic well—being and security.

Through training programs, combined
exercises, military contacts,
interoperability and shared defense with
potential coalition partners, as well as
security assistance programs that include
judicious foreign military sales, we can
strengthen the local self—defense
capabilities of our friends and allies.
Through active participation in regional
security dialogues, we can reduce regional
tensions, increase transparency in armaments
and improve our bilateral and multilateral
cooperation.

By improving the defense capabilities of our
friends and demonstrating our commitment to
defend common interests, these activities
enhance deterrence, encourage
responsibility—sharing on the part of
friends and allies, decrease the likelihood
that U.S. forces will be necessary if
conflict arises and raise the odds that U.S.
forces will find a relatively favorable
situation should a U.S. response be
required.

10

Counterterrorism, Fighting Drug
Trafficking and Other Missions

While the missions outlined above will
remain the primary determinants of our
general purpose and nuclear force structure,
U.S. military forces and assets will also be
called upon to perform a wide range of other
important missions as well. Some of these
can be accomplished by conventional forces
fielded primarily for theater operations.
Often, however, these missions call for
specialized units and capabilities.

Combating Terrorism

As long as terrorist groups continue to
target American citizens and interests, the
United States will need to have specialized
units available to defeat such groups. From
time to time, we might also find it
necessary to strike terrorists at their
bases abroad or to attack assets valued by
the governments that support them.

Our policy in countering international
terrorists is to make no concessions to
terrorists, continue to pressure state
sponsors of terrorism, fully exploit all
available legal mechanisms to punish
international terrorists and help other
governments improve their capabilities to
combat terrorism.

Countering terrorism effectively requires
close day—to—day coordination among
Executive Branch agencies. The Departments
of State, Justice and Defense, the FBI and
CIA continue to cooperate closely in an
ongoing effort against international
terrorists. Positive results will come from
integration of intelligence, diplomatic and
rule—of—law activities, and through close
cooperation with other governments and
international counterterrorist
organizations.

Improving U.S. intelligence capacities is a
significant part of the U.S. response.
Terrorists, whether from well—organized
groups or the kind of more loosely organized
group responsible for the World Trade Center
bombing, have the advantage of being able to
take the initiative in the timing and choice
of targets. Terrorism involving weapons of
mass destruction represents a particularly
dangerous potential threat that must be
countered.

The United States has made concerted efforts
to punish and deter terrorists. On June 26,
1993, following a determination that Iraq
had plotted an assassination attempt

against former President Bush, President
Clinton ordered a cruise missile attack
against the headquarters of Iraq's
intelligence service in order to send a firm
response and deter further threats.
Similarly, the United States obtained
convictions against defendants in the
bombing of the World Trade Center.

U.S. leadership and close coordination with
other governments and international bodies
will continue, as demonstrated by the UN
Security Council sanctions against Libya for
the Pan Am 103 and UTA 772 bombings, a new
international convention dealing with
detecting and controlling plastic
explosives, and two important
counterterrorism treaties — the Protocol for
the Suppression of Unlawful Acts of Violence
at Airports Serving International Aviation
and the Convention for the Suppression of
Unlawful Attacks Against the Safety of
Maritime Navigation.

Fighting Drug Trafficking

The Administration has undertaken a new
approach to the global scourge of drug abuse
and trafficking that will better integrate
domestic and international activities to
reduce both the demand and the supply of
drugs. Ultimate success will depend on
concerted efforts and partnerships by the
public, all levels of government and the
American private sector with other
governments, private groups and
international bodies.

The U.S. has shifted its strategy from the
past emphasis on transit interdiction to a
more evenly balanced effort with source
countries to build institutions, destroy
trafficking organizations and stop supplies.
We will support and strengthen democratic
institutions abroad, denying narcotics
traffickers a fragile political
infrastructure in which to operate. We will
also cooperate with governments that
demonstrate the political will to confront
the narcotics threat.

Two new comprehensive strategies have been
developed, one to deal with the problem of
cocaine and another to address the growing
threat from high—purity heroin entering this
country. We will engage more aggressively
with international organizations, financial
institutions and nongovernmental
organizations in counternarcotics
cooperation.

At home and in the international arena,
prevention, treatment and economic alter—
natives must work hand—in—hand with law
enforcement and interdiction activities.
Long—

term efforts will be maintained to help
nations develop healthy economies with fewer
market incentives for producing narcotics.
The United States has increased efforts
abroad to foster public awareness and
support for governmental cooperation on a
broad range of activities to reduce the
incidence of drug abuse. Public awareness
of a demand problem in producing or
trafficking countries can be converted into
public support and increased governmental
law enforcement to reduce trafficking and
production. There has been a significant
attitudinal change and awareness in Latin
America and the Caribbean, particularly as
producer and transit nations themselves
become plagued with the ill effects of
consumption.

Other Missions

The United States government is also
responsible for protecting the lives and
safety of Americans abroad. In order to
carry out this responsibility, selected U.S.
military forces are trained and equipped to
evacuate Americans from such situations as
the outbreak of civil or international
conflict and natural or man—made disasters.
For example, U.S. Marines evacuated
Americans from Monrovia, Liberia in August
of 1990, and from Mogadishu, Somalia, in
December of that year. In 1991, U.S. forces
evacuated nearly 20,000 Americans from the
Philippines over a three—week period
following the eruption of Mount Pinatubo.
Last year, U.S. Marines coupled with U.S.
airlift, deployed to Burundi to help ensure
the safe evacuation of U.S. citizens from
ethnic fighting in Rwanda.

U.S. forces also provide invaluable training
and advice to friendly governments
threatened by subversion, lawlessness or
insurgency. At any given time, we have
small teams of military experts deployed in
roughly 25 countries helping host
governments cope with such challenges.

U.S. military forces and assets are
frequently called upon to provide assistance
to victims of floods, storms, drought and
other humanitarian disasters. Both at home
and abroad, U.S. forces provide emergency
food, shelter, medical care and security to
those in need.

Finally, the U.S. will continue as a world
leader in space through its technical
expertise and innovation. Over the past 30
years, as more and more nations have
ventured into space, the U.S. has
steadfastly recognized space as an
international region. Since all nations are
immediately accessible from space, the
maintenance of an international

ll

legal regime for space, similar to the
concept of freedom of the high seas, is
especially important. Numerous attempts
have been made in the past to legally limit
access to space by countries that are
unable, either technologically or
economically, to join space—faring nations.
As the commercial importance of space is
developed, the U.S. can expect further
pressure from non—participants to redefine
the status of space, similar to what has
been attempted with exclusive economic zones
constraining the high seas.

Retaining the current international
character of space will remain critical to
achieving U.S. national security goals. Our
main objectives in this area include:

0 Continued freedom of access to and use
of space;

0 Maintaining the U.S. position as the
major economic, political, military and
technological power in space;

0 Deterring threats to U.S. interests in
space and defeating aggressive or
hostile acts against U.S. space assets
if deterrence fails;

o Preventing the spread of weapons of mass
destruction to space;

0 Enhancing global partnerships with other
space—faring nations across the spectrum
of economic, political and security
issues.

Deciding When and How to Employ U.S.
Forces

Our strategy calls for the preparation and
deployment of American military forces in
the United States and abroad to support U.S.
diplomacy in responding to key dangers —
those posed by weapons of mass destruction,
regional aggression and threats to the
stability of states.

Although there may be many demands for U.S.
involvement, the need to husband scarce
resources suggests that we must carefully
select the means and level of our
participation in particular military
operations. And while it is unwise to
specify in advance all the limitations we
will place on our use of force, we must be
as clear as possible about when and how we
will use it.

12

There are three basic categories of national
interests which can merit the use of our
armed forces. The first involves America's
vital interests, i.e., interests which are
of broad, overriding importance to the
survival, security and vitality of our
national entity — the defense of U.S.
territory, citizens, allies and economic
well—being. We will do whatever it takes to
defend these interests, including — when
necessary — the unilateral and decisive use
of military power. This was demonstrated
clearly in Desert Storm and, more recently,
in Vigilant Warrior.

The second category includes cases in which
important, but not vital, U.S. interests are
threatened. That is, the interests at stake
do not affect our national survival, but
they do affect importantly our national
well—being and the character of the world in
which we live. In such cases, military
forces should only be used if they advance
U.S. interests, they are likely to be able
to accomplish their objectives, the costs
and risks of their employment are
commensurate with the interests at stake,
and other means have been tried and have
failed to achieve our objectives. Such uses
of force should also be limited, reflecting
the relative saliency of the interests we
have at stake. Haiti is the most recent
example in this category.

The third category involves primarily
humanitarian interests. Here, our decisions
focus on the resources we can bring to bear
by using unique capabilities of our military
rather than on the combat power of military
force. Generally, the military is not the
best tool to address humanitarian concerns.
But under certain conditions, the use of our
armed forces may be appropriate: when a
humanitarian catastrophe dwarfs the ability
of civilian relief agencies to respond; when
the need for relief is urgent and only the
military has the ability to jump—start the
longer—term response to the disaster; when
the response requires resources unique to
the military; and when the risk to American
troops is minimal. Rwanda is a good case in
point. U.S. military forces performed
unique and essential roles, stabilized the
situation, and then got out, turning the
operation over to the international relief
community.

The decision on whether and when to use
force is therefore dictated first and
foremost by our national interests. In
those specific areas where our vital or
survival interests are at stake, our use of
force will be decisive and, if necessary,
unilateral. In other situations posing a
less immediate threat, our military
engagement must be targeted selectively

on those areas that most affect our national
interests — for instance, areas where we
have a sizable economic stake or commitments
to allies, and areas where there is a
potential to generate substantial refugee
flows into our nation or our allies.

Second, in all cases the costs and risks of
U.S. military involvement must be judged to
be commensurate with the stakes involved.

We will be more inclined to act where there
is reason to believe that our action will
bring lasting improvement. On the other
hand, our involvement will be more circum—
scribed when other regional or multilateral
actors are better positioned to act than we
are. Even in these cases, however, the
United States will be actively engaged at
the diplomatic level. In every case,
however, we will consider several critical
questions before committing military force:
Have we considered non—military means that
offer a reasonable chance of success? Is
there a clearly defined, achievable mission?
What is the environment of risk we are
entering? What is needed to achieve our
goals? What are the potential costs — both
human and financial — of the engagement? Do
we have reasonable assurance of support from
the American people and their elected
representatives? Do we have timelines and
milestones that will reveal the extent of
success or failure, and, in either case, do
we have an exit strategy?

The decision on how we use force has a
similar set of derived guidelines:

First, when we send American troops abroad,
we will send them with a clear mission and,
for those operations that are likely to
involve combat, the means to achieve their
objectives decisively, having answered the
questions: What types of U.S. military
capabilities should be brought to bear, and
is the use of military force carefully
matched to our political objectives?

Second, as much as possible, we will seek
the help of our allies and friends or of

relevant international institutions. If our
most important national interests are at
stake, we are prepared to act alone. But

especially on those matters touching
directly the interests of our allies, there
should be a proportionate commitment from
them. Working together increases the
effectiveness of each nation's actions, and
sharing the responsibilities lessens
everyone's load.

These, then, are the calculations of
interest and cost that have influenced our
past uses of military power and will guide
us in the future. Every time this
Administration

has used force, it has balanced interests
against costs. And in each case, the use of
our military has put power behind our
diplomacy, allowing us to make progress we
would not otherwise have achieved.

One final consideration regards the central
role the American people rightfully play in
how the United States wields its power
abroad: the United States cannot long
sustain a fight without the support of the
public. This is true for humanitarian and
other non—traditional interventions, as well
as war. Modern media communications
confront every American with images which
both stir the impulse to intervene and raise
the question of an operation's costs and
risks. When it is judged in America's
interest to intervene, we must use force
with an unwavering commitment to our
objective. While we must continue to
reassess any operation's costs and benefits
as it unfolds and the full range of our
options, reflexive calls for early
withdrawal of our forces as soon as
casualties arise endangers our objectives as
well as our troops. Doing so invites any
rogue actor to attack our troops to try to
force our departure from areas where our
interests lie.

Combating the Spread and Use of
Weapons of Mass Destruction and
Missiles

Weapons of mass destruction — nuclear,
biological and chemical — along with their
associated delivery systems, pose a major
threat to our security and that of our
allies and other friendly nations. Thus, a
key part of our strategy is to seek to stem
the proliferation of such weapons and to
develop an effective capability to deal with
these threats. We also need to maintain
robust strategic nuclear forces and seek to
implement existing strategic arms
agreements.

Nonproliferation and Counterproliferation

A critical priority for the United States is
to stem the proliferation of nuclear weapons
and other weapons of mass destruction and
their missile delivery systems. Countries‘
weapons programs, and their levels of
cooperation with our nonproliferation
efforts, will be among our most important
criteria in judging the nature of our
bilateral relations.

Through programs such as the Nunn—Lugar

Cooperative Threat Reduction effort and
other denuclearization initiatives,

13

important progress has been made to build a
more secure international environment. One
striking example was the successful transfer
last fall of nearly six hundred kilograms of
vulnerable nuclear material from Kazakhstan
to safe storage in the United States.
Kazakhstan was concerned about the security
of the material and requested U.S. assis—
tance in removing it to safe storage. The
Departments of Defense and Energy undertook
a joint mission to retrieve the uranium.
Similarly, under an agreement we secured
with Russia,it is converting tons of highly—
enriched uranium from dismantled weapons
into commercial reactor fuel for purchase by
the United States. The United States is
also working with Russia to enhance control
and accounting of nuclear material.

As a key part of our effort to control
nuclear proliferation, we seek the
indefinite and unconditional extension of
the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty (NPT)
and its universal application. Achieving a
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty as soon as
possible, ending the unsafeguarded
production of fissile materials for nuclear
weapons purposes and strengthening the
Nuclear Suppliers Group and the Inter—
national Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) are
important goals. They complement our
comprehensive efforts to discourage the ac—
cumulation of fissile materials, to seek to
strengthen controls and constraints on those
materials, and over time, to reduce world—
wide stocks. As President Clinton announced
at last September's UN General Assembly, we
will seek a global ban on the production of
fissile material for nuclear weapons.

To combat missile proliferation, the United
States seeks prudently to broaden membership
of the Missile Technology Control Regime
(MTCR). The Administration supports the
earliest possible ratification and entry in
force of the Chemical Weapons Convention
(CWC) as well as new measures to deter
violations of and enhance compliance with
the Biological Weapons Convention (BWC). We
also support improved export controls for
nonproliferation purposes both domestically
and multilaterally.

The proliferation problem is global, but we
must tailor our approaches to specific
regional contexts. We have concluded an
agreed framework to bring North Korea into
full compliance with its nonproliferation
obligations, including the NPT and IAEA
safeguards. We will continue efforts to
prevent Iran from advancing its weapons of
mass destruction objectives and to thwart
Iraq from reconstituting its previous
programs. The United States seeks to cap,
reduce and, ultimately, eliminate the
nuclear and

14

missile capabilities of India and Pakistan.
In the Middle East and elsewhere, we
encourage regional arms control agreements
that address the legitimate security
concerns of all parties. These tasks are
being pursued with other states that share
our concern for the enormous challenge of
stemming the proliferation of such weapons.

The United States has signed bilateral
agreements with Russia, Ukraine and South
Africa which commit these countries to
adhere to the guidelines of the MTCR. We
also secured China's commitment to observe
the MTCR guidelines and its agreement not to
transfer MTCR controlled ground—to— ground
missiles. Russia has agreed not to transfer
space—launch vehicle technology with
potential military applications to India.
South Africa has agreed to observe the MTCR
guidelines and to dismantle its Category I
missile systems and has joined the NPT and
accepted full—scope safeguards. Hungary,
the Czech Republic, the Slovak Republic and
Poland have joined the Australia Group
(which controls the transfer of items that
could be used to make chemical or biological
weapons). Hungary and Argentina have joined
the MTCR and Brazil has committed itself
publicly to adhere to the MTCR guidelines.
Argentina, Brazil and Chile have brought the
Treaty of Tlatelolco into force. We
continue to push for the dismantlement of
all intercontinental ballistic missiles
located in Ukraine and Kazakhstan. With the
United States and Russia, Ukraine is
pressing forward on implementation of the
Trilateral Statement, which provides for the
transfer of all nuclear warheads from
Ukraine to Russia for dismantlement in
return for fair compensation.

Thus, the United States seeks to prevent
additional countries from acquiring
chemical, biological and nuclear weapons and
the means to deliver them. However, should
such efforts fail, U.S. forces must be
prepared to deter, prevent and defend
against their use. As agreed at the January
1994 NATO Summit, we are working with our
Allies to develop a policy framework to
consider how to reinforce ongoing prevention
efforts and to reduce the proliferation
threat and protect against it.

The United States will retain the capacity
to retaliate against those who might
contemplate the use of weapons of mass
destruction, so that the costs of such use
will be seen as outweighing the gains.
However, to minimize the impact of
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
on our interests, we will need the
capability not only to deter their use
against either ourselves or our allies and
friends, but also, where necessary and
feasible, to prevent it.

This will require improved defensive
capabilities. To minimize the vulnerability
of our forces abroad to weapons of mass
destruction, we are placing a high priority
on improving our ability to locate, identify
and disable arsenals of weapons of mass
destruction, production and storage
facilities for such weapons, and their
delivery systems.

Nuclear Forces

In September, the President approved the
recommendations of the Pentagon's Nuclear
Posture Review (NPR). A key conclusion of
this review is that the United States will
retain a triad of strategic nuclear forces
sufficient to deter any future hostile
foreign leadership with access to strategic
nuclear forces from acting against our vital
interests and to convince it that seeking a
nuclear advantage would be futile.
Therefore, we will continue to maintain
nuclear forces of sufficient size and
capability to hold at risk a broad range of
assets valued by such political and military
leaders. The President approved the NPR's
recommended strategic nuclear force posture
as the U.S. START II force. The forces are:
450—500 Minuteman ICBMs, 14 Trident
submarines all with D—5 missiles, 20 B—2 and
66 B52 strategic bombers, and a non—nuclear

role for the B—1s. This force posture
allows us the flexibility to reconstitute or
reduce further, as conditions warrant. The

NPR also reaffirmed the current posture and

deployment of non—strategic nuclear forces;

the United States will eliminate carrier and
surface ship nuclear weapons capability.

Arms Control

Arms control is an integral part of our
national security strategy. Arms control
can help reduce incentives to initiate
attack; enhance predictability regarding the
size and structure of forces, thus reducing
fear of aggressive intent; reduce the size
of national defense industry establishments
and thus permit the growth of more vital,
nonmilitary industries; ensure confidence in
compliance through effective monitoring and
verification; and, ultimately, contribute to
a more stable and calculable balance of
power.

In the area of strategic arms control,
prescribed reductions in strategic offensive
arms and the steady shift toward less
destabilizing systems remain indispensable.
Ukraine's accession to the Nuclear
Non—proliferation Treaty — joining Belarus‘
and Kazakhstan's decision to be non—

nuclear nations — was followed immediately
by the exchange of instruments of
ratification and brought the START I treaty
into force at the December CSCE summit,
paving the way for ratification of the START
II Treaty. Under START II, the United
States and Russia will each be left with
between 3,000 and 3,500 deployed strategic
nuclear warheads, which is a two—thirds
reduction from the Cold War peak. The two
Presidents agreed that once START II is
ratified, both nations will immediately
begin to deactivate or otherwise remove from
combat status, those systems whose
elimination will be required by that treaty,
rather than waiting for the treaty to run
its course through the year 2003. START II
ratification will also open the door to the
next round of strategic arms control, in
which we will consider what further
reductions in, or limitations on, remaining
U.S. and Russian nuclear forces should be
carried out. We will also explore strategic
confidence building measures and mutual
understandings that reduce the risk of
accidental war.

The full and faithful implementation of
other existing arms control agreements,
including the Anti—Ballistic Missile (ABM)
Treaty, Strategic Arms Reduction Talks I
(START I), Biological Weapons Convention
(BWC), Intermediate range Nuclear Forces
(INF) Treaty, Conventional Forces in Europe
(CFE) Treaty, several nuclear testing
agreements, the 1994 Vienna Document on
Confidence and Security Building Measures
(CSBMs), Open Skies, the Environmental
Modification Convention (EnMod), Incidents
at Sea and many others will remain an
important element of national security
policy. The on—going negotiation initiated
by the United States to clarify the ABM
Treaty by establishing an agreed demarcation
between strategic and theater ballistic
missiles and update the Treaty to reflect
the break—up of the Soviet Union reflects
the Administration's commitment to
maintaining the integrity and effectiveness
of crucial arms control agreements.

Future arms control efforts may become more
regional and multilateral. Regional
arrangements can add predictability and
openness to security relations, advance the
rule of international law and promote
cooperation among participants. They help
maintain deterrence and a stable military
balance at regional levels. The U.S. is
prepared to promote, help negotiate, monitor
and participate in regional arms control
undertakings compatible with American
national security interests. We will gene—
rally support such undertakings but will not
seek to impose regional arms control accords
against the wishes of affected states.

15

As arms control, whether regional or global,
becomes increasingly multilateral, the
Conference on Disarmament (CD) in Geneva

will play an even more important role. The
U.S. will support measures to increase the
effectiveness and relevance of the CD. Arms

control agreements can head off potential
arms races in certain weapons categories or
in some environments. We will continue to
seek greater transparency, responsibility
and, where appropriate, restraint in the
transfer of conventional weapons and global
military spending. The UN register of
conventional arms transfers is a start in
promoting greater transparency of weapons
transfers and buildups, but more needs to be
done. The U.S. has proposed that the new
regime to succeed the Coordinating Committee
(COCOM) focus on conventional arms sales and

dual—use technologies. Where appropriate,
the United States will continue to pursue
such efforts vigorously. Measures to reduce

oversized defense industrial establishments,
especially those parts involved with weapons
of mass destruction, will also contribute to
stability in the post—Cold War world. The
Administration also will pursue defense
conversion agreements with the Former Soviet
Union (FSU) states, and defense conversion
is also on the agenda with China. The
United States has also proposed a regime to
reduce the number and availability of the
world's long—lived antipersonnel mines whose
indiscriminate and irresponsible use has
reached crisis proportions. As another part
of our effort to address this landmine
problem, the Administration has also
submitted the Convention on Conventional
Weapons to the Senate for advice and
consent.

Peace Operations

In addition to preparing for major regional
contingencies, we must prepare our forces
for peace operations to support democracy or
conflict resolution. The United States,
along with others in the international
community, will seek to prevent and contain
localized conflicts before they require a
military response. U.S. support
capabilities such as airlift, intelligence,
and global communications, have often
contributed to the success of multilateral
peace operations, and they will continue to
do so. U.S. combat units are less likely to
be used for most peace operations, but in
some cases their use will be necessary or
desirable and justified by U.S. national
interests as guided by the Presidential
Decision Directive, "U.S. Policy on
Reforming Multilateral Peace Operations,"
and outlined below.

16

Multilateral peace operations are an
important component of our strategy. From
traditional peacekeeping to peace
enforcement, multilateral peace operations
are sometimes the best way to prevent,
contain, or resolve conflicts that could
otherwise be far more costly and deadly.

Peace operations often have served, and
continue to serve, important U.S. national
interests. In some cases, they have helped
preserve peace between nations, as in Cyprus
and the Golan Heights. In others,
peacekeepers have provided breathing room
for fledgling democracies, as in Cambodia,
El Salvador and Namibia.

At the same time, however, we must recognize
that some types of peace operations make
demands on the UN that exceed the
organization's current capabilities. The
United States is working with the UN head—
quarters and other member states to ensure
that the UN embarks only on peace operations
that make political and military sense and
that the UN is able to manage effectively
those peace operations it does undertake.

We support the creation of a professional UN
peace operations head—quarters with a
planning staff, access to timely
intelligence, a logistics unit that can be
rapidly deployed and a modern operations
center with global communi—cations. The
United States will reduce our peacekeeping
payments to 25 percent while working to
ensure that other nations pay their fair
share. We are also working to ensure that
peacekeeping operations by appropriate
regional organizations such as NATO and the
OSCE can be carried out effectively.

In order to maximize the benefits of UN
peace operations, the United States must
make highly disciplined choices about when
and under what circumstances to support or
participate in them. The need to exercise
such discipline is at the heart of President
Clinton's policy on Reforming Multilateral
Peace Operations. Far from handing a blank
check to the UN, the President's policy
review on peace operations — the most
thorough ever undertaken by an
Administration — requires the United States
to undertake a rigorous analysis of
requirements and capabilities before voting
to support or participate in peace
operations. The United States has not
hesitated to use its position on the
Security Council to ensure that the UN
authorizes only those peace operations that
meet these standards.

Most UN peacekeeping operations do not
involve U.S. forces. On those occasions
when we consider contributing U.S. forces to
a UN peace operation, we will employ

rigorous criteria, including the same
principles that would guide any decision to
employ U.S. forces. In addition, we will
ensure that the risks to U.S. personnel and
the command and control arrangements
governing the participation of American and
foreign forces are acceptable to the United
States.

The question of command and control is
particularly critical. There may be times
when it is in our interest to place U.S.
troops under the temporary operational
control of a competent UN or allied
commander. The United States has done so
many times in the past — from the siege of
Yorktown in the Revolutionary War to the
battles of Desert Storm. However, under no
circumstances will the President ever
relinquish his command authority over U.S.
forces.

Improving the ways the United States and the
UN decide upon and conduct peace operations
will not make the decision to engage any
easier. The lesson we must take away from
our first ventures in peace operations is
not that we should forswear such operations
but that we should employ this tool
selectively and more effectively. In short,
the United States views peace operations as
a means to support our national security
strategy, not as a strategy unto itself.

The President is firmly committed to
securing the active support of the Congress
for U.S. participation in peace operations.
The Administration has set forth a detailed
blueprint to guide consultations with
Congress. With respect to particular
operations, the Administration will
undertake consultations on questions such as
the nature of expected U.S. military
participation, the mission parameters of the
operation, the expected duration, and
budgetary implications. In addition to such
operation— specific consultations, the
Administration has also conducted regular
monthly briefings for congressional staff,
and will deliver an Annual Comprehensive
Report to Congress on Peace Operations.
Congress is critical to the institutional
development of a successful U.S. policy on
peace operations, including the resolution
of funding issues which have an impact on
military readiness.

Two other points deserve emphasis. First,
the primary mission of our Armed Forces is
not peace operations; it is to deter and, if
necessary, to fight and win conflicts in
which our most important interests are
threatened. Second while the international
community can create conditions

for peace, the responsibility for peace
ultimately rests with the people of the
country in question.

Strong Intelligence Capabilities

U.S. intelligence capabilities are critical
instruments of our national power and remain
an integral part of our national security
strategy. Only a strong intelligence effort
can provide adequate warning of threats to
U.S. national security and identify
opportunities for advancing our interests.
Policy analysts, decisionmakers and military
commanders at all levels will continue to
rely on our intelligence community to
collect information unavailable from other
sources and to provide strategic and
tactical analysis to help surmount potential
challenges to our military, political and
economic interests.

Because national security has taken on a
much broader definition in this post—Cold
War era, intelligence must address a much
wider range of threats and dangers. We will
continue to monitor military and technical
threats, to guide long—term force
development and weapons acquisition, and to
directly support military operations.
Intelligence will also be critical for
directing new efforts against regional
conflicts, proliferation of WMD,
counterintelligence, terrorism and narcotics
trafficking. In order to adequately
forecast dangers to democracy and to U.S.
economic well—being, the intelligence
community must track political, economic,
social and military developments in those
parts of the world where U.S. interests are
most heavily engaged and where overt
collection of information from open sources
is inadequate. Finally, to enhance the
study and support of worldwide
environmental, humanitarian and disaster
relief activities, technical intelligence
assets (principally imagery) must be
directed to a greater degree towards
collection of data on these subjects.

The collection and analysis of intelligence
related to economic development will play an
increasingly important role in helping
policy makers understand economic trends.
That collection and analysis can help level
the economic playing field by identifying
threats to U.S. companies from foreign
intelligence services and unfair trading
practices.

This strategy requires that we take steps to
reinforce current intelligence capabilities

and overt foreign service reporting, within

the limits of our resources, and similar

17

steps to enhance coordination of clandestine
and overt collection. Key goals include to.

0 Provide timely warning of strategic
threats, whether from the remaining
arsenal of weapons in the former Soviet
Union or from other nations with weapons
of mass destruction;

0 Ensure timely intelligence support to
military operations;

0 Provide early warning of potential
crises and facilitate preventive
diplomacy;

0 Develop new strategies for collection,
production and dissemination (including
closer relationships between
intelligence producers and consumers) to
make intelligence products more
responsive to current consumer needs;

0 Improve worldwide technical capabilities
to detect, identify and determine the
efforts of foreign nations to develop
weapons of mass destruction;

0 Enhance counterintelligence
capabilities;

0 Provide focused support for law
enforcement agencies in areas like
counternarcotics, counterterrorism and
illegal technology trade;

0 Streamline intelligence operations and
organizations to gain efficiency and
integration;

0 Revise long—standing security
restrictions where possible to make
intelligence data more useful to
intelligence consumers.

0 Develop security countermeasures based
on sound threat analysis and risk
management practices

To advance these goals the President
significantly restructured
counterintelligence policy development and
interagency coordination. In a Presidential
Decision Directive (PDD) on U.S.
counterintelligence effectiveness, the
President took immediate steps to improve
our ability to counter both traditional and
new threats to our Nation's security in the
post—Cold War era. The President further
directed a comprehensive restructuring of
the process by which our security policies,
practices and procedures are

18

developed and implemented. The PDD on
Security Policy Coordination ensures the
development of security policies and
practices that realistically meet the
threats we face as they continue to evolve,
at a price we can afford, while guaranteeing
the fair and equitable treatment of all
Americans upon whom we rely to guard our
nation's security. Consistent with the
provisions of the FY 1995 Intelligence
Authorization Act, President Clinton has
also directed the Chairman of the Foreign
Intelligence Advisory Board to conduct a
comprehensive review of the roles and
missions of the intelligence community and
fundamentally evaluate and define the need
for intelligence in the post—Cold War
environment.

The Environment and Sustainable
Development

The more clearly we understand the complex
interrelationships between the different
parts of our world's environment, the better
we can understand the regional and even
global effects of local changes to the
environment. Increasing competition for the
dwindling reserves of uncontaminated air,
arable land, fisheries and other food
sources, and water, once considered "free"
goods, is already a very real risk to
regional stability around the world. The
range of environmental risks serious enough
to jeopardize international stability
extends to massive population flight from
man—made or natural catastrophes, such as
Chernobyl or the East African drought, and
to large—scale ecosystem damage caused by
industrial pollution, deforestation, loss of
biodiversity, ozone depletion,
desertification, ocean pollution and
ultimately climate change. Strategies
dealing with environmental issues of this
magnitude will require partnerships between
governments and nongovernmental
organizations, cooperation between nations
and regions, and a commitment to a
strategically focused, long—term policy for
emerging environmental risks.

The decisions we make today regarding
military force structures typically
influence our ability to respond to threats
20 to 30 years in the future. Similarly,
our current decisions regarding the
environment and natural resources will
affect the magnitude of their security risks
over at least a comparable period of time,
if not longer. The measure of our
difficulties in the future will be settled
by the steps we take in the present.

As a priority initiative, the U.S.
successfully led efforts at the September
Cairo Conference to develop a consensus
Program of Action to address the continuous
climb in global population, including
increased availability of family planning
and reproductive health services,
sustainable economic development, the
empowerment of women to include enhanced
educational opportunities and a reduction in
infant and child mortality. Rapid
population growth in the developing world
and unsustainable consumption patterns in
industrialized nations are the root of both
present and potentially even greater forms
of environmental degradation and resource
depletion. A conservative estimate of the
globe's population projects 8.5 billion
people on the planet by the year 2025. Even
when making the most generous allowances for
advances in science and technology, one
cannot help but conclude that population
growth and environmental pressures will feed
into immense social unrest and make the
world substantially more vulnerable to
serious international frictions.

Promoting Prosperity at Home

A central goal of our national security
strategy is to promote America's prosperity
through efforts both at home and abroad.
Our economic and security interests are
increasingly inseparable. Our prosperity at
home depends on engaging actively abroad.
The strength of our diplomacy, our ability
to maintain an unrivaled military, the
attractiveness of our values abroad — all
these depend in part on the strength of our
economy.

Enhancing American Competitiveness

Our primary economic goal is to strengthen
the American economy. The first step toward
that goal was reducing the federal deficit
and the burden it imposes on the economy and
future generations. The economic program
passed in 1993 has restored investor
confidence in the U.S. and strengthened our
position in international economic
negotiations. Under the Clinton economic
plan, the deficit will be reduced over 700
billion dollars by Fiscal Year 1998.
President Clinton has also lowered the
deficit as a percentage of the Gross
Domestic Product from 4.9 percent in Fiscal
Year 1992 to 2.4 percent in Fiscal Year 1995
— the lowest since 1979.

And Fiscal Year 1995 will be the first time
that the deficit has been reduced three
years in a row since the Truman
Administration. We are building on this
deficit reduction

effort with other steps to improve American
competitiveness: investing in science and
technology; assisting defense conversion;
improving information networks and other
vital infrastructure; and improving
education and training programs for
America's workforce. We are structuring our
defense R&D effort to place greater emphasis
on dual—use technologies that can enhance
competitiveness and meet pressing military
needs. We are also reforming the defense
acquisition system so that we can develop
and procure weapons and materiel more
efficiently.

Partnership with Business and Labor

Our economic strategy views the private
sector as the engine of economic growth. It
sees government's role as a partner to the
private sector, acting as an advocate of
U.S. business interests; leveling the
playing field in international markets;
helping to boost American exports; and
finding ways to remove domestic and foreign
barriers to the creativity, initiative and
productivity of American business.

To this end, on September 29, 1993, the
Administration published its report creating
America's first national export strategy and
making 65 specific recommendations for
reforming the way government works with the
private sector to expand exports. Among the
recommendations were significant
improvements in advocacy, export financing,
market information systems and product
standards education. The results of these
reforms could enable U.S. exports to reach
the trillion dollar mark by the turn of the
century, which would help create at least
six million new American jobs.

Another critical element in boosting U.S.
exports is reforming the outdated export
licensing system. That reform began with
significant liberalization of export
licensing controls for computers,
supercomputers and telecommunications
equipment. The Administration is also
seeking comprehensive reform of the Export
Administration Act, which governs the
process of export licensing. The goal of
this reform is to strengthen our ability to
prevent proliferation and protect other
national interests, while removing
unnecessarily burdensome licensing
requirements left over from the Cold War.

Enhancing Access to Foreign Markets
The success of American business is more

than ever dependent upon success in
international markets. The

19

ability to compete internationally also
assures that our companies will continue to
innovate and increase productivity, which
will in turn lead to improvements in our own
living standards. But to compete abroad,
our firms need access to foreign markets,
just as foreign industries have access to
our open market. We vigorously pursue
measures to increase access for our
companies — through bilateral, regional and
multilateral arrangements.

The North American Free Trade
Agreement

On December 3, 1993, President Clinton
signed the North American Free Trade Act
(NAFTA), which creates a free trade zone
among the United States, Canada and Mexico.
NAFTA has already created more than 100,000
American jobs. NAFTA has increased Mexico's
capacity to cooperate with our nation on a
wide range of issues that cross our 2000
mile border — including the environment,
narcotics trafficking and illegal
immigration.

Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation

Our economic relations depend vitally on our
ties with the Asia Pacific region, which is
the world's fastest—growing economic region.
In November 1993, President Clinton convened
the first—ever summit of the leaders of the
economies that constitute the Asia—Pacific
Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum. U.S.
initiatives in the APEC forum will open new
opportunities for economic cooperation and
permit U.S. companies to become involved in
substantial infrastructure planning and
construction throughout the region. The
trade and investment framework agreed to in
1993 provided the basis for enhancing the
"open regionalism" that defines APEC. At
the second leaders meeting in November 1994,
the leaders of APEC further drove the
process by accepting the goal of free and
open trade and investment throughout the
region by early in the 21st Century, and
agreeing to lay out a blueprint for
achieving that goal by the Osaka APEC
leaders meeting.

Uruguay Round of GATT

The successful conclusion in December 1993
of the Uruguay Round of the negotiations
under the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade (GATT) significantly strengthened the
world trading system. The Uruguay Round
accord is the largest, most comprehensive
trade agreement in history. It will create
hundreds of thousands

20

of new U.S. jobs and expand opportunities
for U.S. businesses. For the first time,
international trade rules will apply to
services, intellectual property and
investments, and effective rules will apply
to agriculture. The Uruguay Round also
continued the cuts in tariff rates
throughout the world that began just after
the Second World War. Working with
Congress, the President secured U.S.
approval of this pathbreaking agreement and
the resulting World Trade Organization which
provides a forum to resolve disputes openly.
The President remains committed to ensuring
that the commitments in the Uruguay Round
agreement are fulfilled.

U.S. - Japan Framework Agreement

While Japan is America's second—largest
export market, foreign access to the
Japanese market remains limited in important
sectors, including automobiles and
automobile parts. Japan's persistent
current account surpluses are a major
imbalance in the global economy. In July
1993 President Clinton and Japanese Prime
Minister Miyazawa established the U.S.—Japan
Framework for Economic Partnership to
redress the imbalances in our economic
relationship. In October 1994, the United
States and Japan reached framework
agreements regarding government procurement
of medical technologies and
telecommunications (including Nippon
Telephone and Telegraph (NPP) procurement).
In December, we concluded a further
agreement on flat glass. We have also
reached framework agreements on financial
services and intellectual property rights.
The Administration is committed to ensuring
that competitive American goods and services
have fair access to the Japanese market. We
will continue to work to ensure that Japan
takes measures to open its markets and
stimulate its economy, both to benefit its
own people and to fulfill its international
responsibilities.

Summit of the Americas

America's economy benefits enormously from
the opportunity offered by the commitment of
the democratic nations of the Western
Hemisphere to negotiate a free trade
agreement for the region by 2005. The
Western Hemisphere is our largest export
market, constituting over 35 percent of all
U.S. sales abroad. The action plan will
accelerate progress toward free, integrated
markets which will create new high—wage jobs
and sustain economic growth for America.

The invitation to Chile to begin
negotiations to join NAFTA is the first step
toward the Summit's goal of reaching a
hemispheric free—trade zone.

Expanding the Realm of Free Trade

The conclusion of NAFTA, the Uruguay Round,
the Bogor Declaration of the 1994 APEC
leaders meeting, and the Summit of the
Americas‘ action plan represents
unprecedented progress toward more open
markets both at the regional and global
levels. The Administration intends to
continue its efforts in further enhancing
U.S. access to foreign markets. The World
Trade Organization will provide a new
institutional lever for securing such
access. Emerging markets, particularly
along the Pacific Rim, present vast
opportunities for American enterprise, and
APEC now provides a suitable vehicle for the
exploration of such opportunities.
Similarly, the United States convened the
Summit of the Americas to seize the
opportunities created by the movement toward
open markets throughout the hemisphere. All
such steps in the direction of expanded
trading relationships will be undertaken in
a way consistent with protection of the
international environment and to the goal of
sustainable development here and abroad.

Strengthening Macroeconomic
Coordination

As national economies become more integrated
internationally, the U.S. cannot thrive in
isolation from developments abroad.
International economic expansion is
benefiting from G—7 macroeconomic policy
coordination. To improve global
macroeconomic performance, we will continue
to work through the G—7 process to promote
growth—oriented policies to complement our
own efforts.

Providing for Energy Security

The United States depends on oil for more
than 40% of its primary energy needs.
Roughly 45% of our oil needs are met with
imports, and a large share of these imports
come from the Persian Gulf area. The
experiences of the two oil shocks and the
Gulf War show that an interruption of oil
supplies can have a significant impact on
the economies of the United States and its
allies. Appropriate economic responses can
substantially mitigate the balance of
payments and inflationary impacts of an oil
shock; appropriate foreign policy responses
to events such as Iraq's invasion of Kuwait
can limit the magnitude of the crisis.

Over the longer term, the United States‘
dependence on access to foreign oil sources
will be increasingly important

as our resources are depleted. The U.S.
economy has grown roughly 75% since the
first oil shock; yet during that time our
oil consumption has remained virtually
stable and oil production has declined.

High oil prices did not generate enough new
oil exploration and discovery to sustain
production levels from our depleted resource
base. These facts show the need for
continued and extended reliance on energy
efficiency and conservation and development
of alternative energy sources. Conservation
measures notwithstanding, the U.S. has a
vital interest in unrestricted access to
this critical resource.

Promoting Sustainable Development
Abroad

Broad—based economic development not only
improves the prospects for democratic
development in developing countries, but
also expands the demands for U.S. exports.
Economic growth abroad can alleviate
pressure on the global environment, reduce
the attraction of illegal narcotics trade
and improve the health and economic
productivity of global populations.

The environmental aspects of ill—designed
economic growth are clear. Environmental
damage will ultimately block economic
growth. Rapid urbanization is outstripping
the ability of nations to provide jobs,
education and other services to new
citizens. The continuing poverty of a
quarter of the world's people leads to
hunger, malnutrition, economic migration and
political unrest. Widespread illiteracy and
lack of technical skills hinder employment
opportunities and drive entire populations
to support themselves on increasingly
fragile and damaged resource bases. New
diseases such as AIDS and epidemics, often
spread through environmental degradation,
threaten to overwhelm the health facilities
of developing countries, disrupt societies
and stop economic growth. These realities
must be addressed by sustainable development
programs which offer viable alternatives.
U.S. leadership is of the essence. If such
alternatives are not developed, the
consequences for the planet's future will be
grave indeed.

Domestically, the U.S. must work hard to
halt local and cross—border environmental
degradation. In addition, the U.S. should
foster environmental technology targeting
pollution prevention, control, and cleanup.
Companies that invest in energy efficiency,
clean manufacturing, and environmental
services today will create the high—quality,
high—wage jobs of tomorrow. By providing
access to these types of technologies, our
exports can also provide the

21

means for other nations to achieve
environmentally sustainable economic growth.
At the same time, we are taking ambitious
steps at home to better manage our natural
resources and reduce energy and other
consumption, decrease waste generation and
increase our recycling efforts.

Internationally, the Administration's
foreign assistance program focuses on four
key elements of sustainable development:
broad—based economic growth; the
environment; population and health; and
democracy. We will continue to advocate
environmentally sound private investment and
responsible approaches by international
lenders. At our urging, the Multilateral
Development Banks (MDB‘s) are now placing
increased emphasis upon sustainable
development in their funding decisions, to
include a commitment to perform
environmental assessments on projects for
both internal and public scrutiny. In
particular, the Global Environmental
Facility (GEF), established last year, will
provide a source of financial assistance to
the developing world for climate change,
biodiversity and oceans initiatives.

The U.S. is taking specific steps now in all
of these areas:

0 In June 1993, the United States signed
the Convention on Biological Diversity,
which aims to protect and utilize the
world's genetic inheritance. The
Interior Department has been directed to
create a national biological survey to
help protect species and to help the
agricultural and biotechnical industries
identify new sources of food, fiber and
medications.

0 New policies are being implemented to
ensure the sustainable management of
U.S. forests by the year 2000, as
pledged internationally. In addition,
U.S. bilateral forest assistance
programs are being expanded, and the
United States is promoting sustainable
management of tropical forests.

o In the wake of the 1992 United Nations
Conference on Environment and
Development, the United States has
sought to reduce land—based sources of
marine pollution, maintain populations
of marine species at healthy and
productive levels and protect endangered
marine mammals.

22

o The United States has focused technical
assistance and encouraged
nongovernmental environmental groups to
provide expertise to the republics of
the Former Soviet Union and Central and
Eastern European nations that have
suffered the most acute environmental
crises. The Agency for International
Development, the Environmental
Protection Agency and other U.S.
agencies are engaged in technical
cooperation with many countries around
the world to advance these goals.

0 The Administration is leading a renewed
global effort to address population
problems and promote international
consensus for stabilizing world
population growth. Our comprehensive
approach will stress family planning and
reproductive health care, maternal and
child health, education and improving
the status of women. The International
Conference on Population Development,
held in September in Cairo, endorsed
these approaches as important strategies
in achieving our global population
goals.

Promoting Democracy
All of America's strategic interests — from

promoting prosperity at home to checking
global threats abroad before they threaten

our territory — are served by enlarging the
community of democratic and free market
nations. Thus, working with new democratic

states to help preserve them as democracies
committed to free markets and respect for
human rights, is a key part of our national
security strategy.

One of the most gratifying and encouraging
developments of the past 15 years is the
explosion in the number of states moving
away from repressive governance and toward
democracy. Since the success of many of
those experiments is by no means assured,
our strategy of enlargement must focus on
the consolidation of those regimes and the
broadening of their commitment to democracy.
At the same time, we seek to increase
respect for fundamental human rights in all
states and encourage an evolution to
democracy where that is possible.

The enlargement of the community of market
democracies respecting human rights and the
environment is manifest in a number of ways:

o More than 30 nations in Central and
Eastern Europe, the former Soviet Union,
Latin America, Africa and East Asia
have, over the past 10 years, adopted
the structures of a constitutional
democracy and held free elections;

0 The nations of the Western Hemisphere
have proclaimed their commitment to
democratic regimes and to the collective
responsibility of the nations of the OAS
to respond to threats to democracy.

0 In the Western Hemisphere, only Cuba is
not a democratic state.

0 Nations as diverse as South Africa,
Cambodia and El Salvador have resolved
bitter internal disputes with agreement
on the creation of constitutional
democracies.

The first element of our democracy strategy
is to work with the other democracies of the
world and to improve our cooperation with
them on security and economic issues. We
also seek their support in enlarging the
realm of democratic nations.

The core of our strategy is to help
democracy and markets expand and survive in
other places where we have the strongest
security concerns and where we can make the
greatest difference. This is not a
democratic crusade; it is a pragmatic
commitment to see freedom take hold where
that will help us most. Thus, we must
target our effort to assist states that
affect our strategic interests, such as
those with large economies, critical
locations, nuclear weapons or the potential
to generate refugee flows into our own
nation or into key friends and allies. We
must focus our efforts where we have the
most leverage. And our efforts must be
demand—driven — they must focus on nations
whose people are pushing for reform or have
already secured it.

Russia is a key state in this regard. If we
can support and help consolidate democratic
and market reforms in Russia (and the other

newly independent states), we can help turn
a former threat into a region of valued
diplomatic and economic partners. Our

intensified interaction with Ukraine has
helped move that country on to the path of
economic reform, which is critical to its
long—term stability. In addition, our
efforts in Russia, Ukraine and the other
states support and facilitate our efforts to
achieve

continued reductions in nuclear arms and
compliance with international
nonproliferation accords.

The new democracies in Central and Eastern
Europe are another clear example, given
their proximity to the great democratic
powers of Western Europe, their importance
to our security, and their potential
markets.

Since our ties across the Pacific are no
less important than those across the
Atlantic, pursuing enlargement in the Asian
Pacific is a third example. We will work to
support the emerging democracies of the
region and to encourage other states along
the same path.

Continuing the great strides toward
democracy and markets in our hemisphere is
also a key concern and was behind the
President's decision to host the Summit of
the Americas in December 1994. As we
continue such efforts, we should be on the
lookout for states whose entry into the camp
of market democracies may influence the
future direction of an entire region; South
Africa now holds that potential with regard
to sub—Saharan Africa.

How should the United States help
consolidate and enlarge democracy and
markets in these states? The answers are as
varied as the nations involved, but there
are common elements. We must continue to
help lead the effort to mobilize
international resources, as we have with
Russia, Ukraine and the other new
independent states. We must be willing to
take immediate public positions to help
staunch democratic reversals, as we have in
Haiti and Guatemala. We must give
democratic nations the fullest benefits of
integration into foreign markets, which is
part of why NAFTA and the GATT ranked so
high on our agenda. And we must help these
nations strengthen the pillars of civil
society, improve their market institutions,
and fight corruption and political discon—
tent through practices of good governance.

At the same time as we work to ensure the
success of emerging democracies, we must
also redouble our efforts to guarantee basic
human rights on a global basis. At the 1993
United Nations Conference on Human Rights,
the United States forcefully and
successfully argued for a reaffirmation of
the universality of such rights and improved
international mechanisms for their
promotion. In the wake of this gathering,
the UN has named a High Commissioner for
Human Rights, and the rights of women have
been afforded a new international
precedence. The United

23

States has taken the lead in assisting the
UN to set up international tribunals to
enforce accountability for the war crimes in
the former Yugoslavia and in Rwanda.

The United States also continues to work for
the protection of human rights on a
bilateral basis. To demonstrate our own
willingness to adhere to international human
rights standards, the United States ratified
the international convention prohibiting
discrimination on the basis of race, and the
Administration is seeking Senate consent to
ratification for the convention prohibiting
discrimination against women. The United
States will play a major role in promoting
women's rights internationally at the UN
Women's Conference in September.

In all these efforts, a policy of engagement
and enlargement should take on a second
meaning: we should pursue our goals through
an enlarged circle not only of government
officials but also of private and
nongovernmental groups. Private firms are
natural allies in our efforts to strengthen
market economies. Similarly, our goal of
strengthening democracy and civil society
has a natural ally in labor unions, human
rights groups, environmental advocates,
chambers of commerce and election monitors.
Just as we rely on force multipliers in
defense, we should welcome these "diplomacy
multipliers," such as the National Endowment
for Democracy.

Supporting the global movement toward
democracy requires a pragmatic and long—term
effort focused on both values and
institutions. The United States must build
on the opportunities achieved through the
successful conclusion of the Cold War. Our
long—term goal is a world in which each of
the major powers is democratic, with many
other nations joining the community of
market democracies as well.

Our efforts to promote democracy and human
rights are complemented by our humanitarian
assistance programs which are designed to
alleviate human suffering and to

24

pave the way for progress towards
establishing democratic regimes with a
commitment to respect for human rights and
appropriate strategies for economic
development. We are also exploring ideas
such as the suggestion of Argentina's
President Menem for the creation of an
international civilian rapid response
capability for humanitarian crises,
including a school and training for
humanitarian operations.

Through humanitarian assistance and policy
initiatives aimed at the sources of
disruption, we seek to mitigate the
contemporary migration and refugee crises,
foster longterm global cooperation and
strengthen involved international
institutions. The U.S. will provide
appropriate financial support and will work
with other nations and international bodies,
such as the International Red Cross and the
UN High Commissioner for Refugees, in
seeking voluntary repatriation of refugees —
taking into full consideration human rights
concerns as well as the economic conditions
that may have driven them out in the first
place. Helping refugees return to their
homes in Mozambique, Afghanistan, Eritrea,
Somalia and Guatemala, for example, is a
high priority.

Relief efforts will continue for people
displaced by the conflict in Bosnia and
other republics of the former Yugoslavia.

We will act in concert with other nations
and the UN against the illegal smuggling of
Chinese into this country. In concert with
the tools of diplomatic, economic and
military power, our humanitarian and refugee
policies can bear results, as was evident in
Haiti. We provided temporary safe haven at
Guantanamo Naval Base for those Haitians who
feared for their safety and left by sea
until we helped restore democracy.

III. INTEGRATED REGIONAL APPROACHES

The United States is a genuinely global
power. Our policy toward each of the
world's regions reflects our overall
strategy tailored to their unique challenges
and opportunities. This section highlights
the application of our strategy to each of
the world's regions; our broad objectives
and thrust, rather than an exhaustive list
of all our policies and interests. It
illustrates how we integrate our commitment
to the promotion of democracy and the
enhancement of American prosperity with our
security requirements to produce a mutually
reinforcing policy.

Europe and Eurasia

Our strategy of enlargement and engagement
is central to U.S. policy towards post—Cold
War Europe. European stability is vital to
our own security, a lesson we have learned
twice at great cost this century. Vibrant
European economies mean more jobs for
Americans at home and investment
opportunities abroad. With the collapse of
the Soviet empire and the emergence of new
democracies in its wake, the United States
has an unparalleled opportunity to
contribute toward a free and undivided
Europe. Our goal is an integrated
democratic Europe cooperating with the
United States to keep the peace and promote
prosperity.

The first and most important element of our
strategy in Europe must be security through
military strength and cooperation. The Cold
War is over, but war itself is not over.

As we know, war continues in the former
Yugoslavia. While that war does not pose a
direct threat to our security or warrant
unilateral U.S. involvement, U.S. policy is
focused on five goals: achieving a political
settlement in

Bosnia that preserves the country's
territorial integrity and provides a viable
future for all its peoples; preventing the
spread of the fighting into a broader Balkan
war that could threaten both allies and the
stability of new democratic states in
Central and Eastern Europe; stemming the
destabilizing flow of refugees from the
conflict; halting the slaughter of
innocents; and helping to support NATO's
central role in post—Cold War Europe while
maintaining our role in shaping Europe's
security architecture.

Our leadership paved the way to NATO's
February 1994 ultimatum that ended the heavy
Serb bombardment of Sarajevo, Bosnia‘s
capital. Our diplomatic leadership brought
an end to the fighting between the Muslims
and Croats in Bosnia and helped establish a
bicommunal Bosnian—Croat Federation. Since
April 1994, we have been working with the
warring parties through the Contact Group
(United States, Russia, United Kingdom,
France and Germany) to help the parties
reach a negotiated settlement. Our goal is
to bring an end to the war in Bosnia
consistent with the Contact Group plan which
would preserve Bosnia as a single state
within its existing borders while providing
for an equitable division of territory
between the Muslim—Croat Federation and the
Bosnian Serb entity. While we have not yet
succeeded in achieving a political
settlement, diplomatic efforts in the final
months of 1994 helped produce a cease—fire
and a cessation of hostilities agreement
that took effect on January 1, 1995. On
this basis, efforts are now underway with
our Contact Group partners to renew
negotiations on a political settlement based
on the Contact Group plan.

Should these new diplomatic efforts falter,
we remain prepared to move forward with our
proposal at the UN to lift the arms embargo
on Bosnia—Herzegovina, multilaterally. We
remain strongly opposed to a unilateral
lifting of

25

the arms embargo as a step that would have
grave consequences for NATO and U.S.
interests. Should large—scale fighting
resume and UN troops need to be withdrawn,
the President has agreed, in principle, to
provide U.S. support, including the use of
ground forces, to a NATO—led operation to
help assure a safe withdrawal. We also
remain prepared to help implement a final
peace settlement in Bosnia.

As we work to resolve that tragedy and ease
the suffering of its victims we also need to
transform European and trans—Atlantic
institutions so they can better address such
conflicts and advance Europe's integration.
Many institutions will play a role,

including the European Union (EU), the
Western European Union (WEU), the Council of
Europe (CE), the Organization for Security

and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the
United Nations. But NATO, history's
greatest political—military alliance, must
be central to that process.

The NATO alliance will remain the anchor of
American engagement in Europe and the
linchpin of transatlantic security. That is
why we must keep it strong, vital and
relevant. For the United States and its
allies, NATO has always been far more than a
transitory response to a temporary threat.
It has been a guarantor of European
democracy and a force for European
stability. That is why its mission endures
even though the Cold War has receded into
the past. And that is why its benefits are
so clear to Europe's new democracies.

Only NATO has the military forces, the
integrated command structure, the broad
legitimacy and the habits of cooperation
that are essential to draw in new
participants and respond to new challenges.
One of the deepest transformations within
the transatlantic community over the past
half—century occurred because the armed
forces of our respective nations trained,
studied and marched through their careers
together. It is not only the compatibility
of our weapons, but the camaraderie of our
warriors that provide the sinews behind our
mutual security guarantees and our best hope
for peace.

Since the end of the Cold War, the United
States has significantly reduced the level
of U.S. military forces stationed in Europe.
We have determined that a force of roughly
100,000 U.S. military personnel assigned to
U.S. European command will preserve U.S.
influence and leadership in NATO and provide
a deterrent posture that is

26

visible to all Europeans. While we continue
to examine the proper mix of forces, this
level of permanent presence, augmented by
forward deployed naval forces and
reinforcements available from the United
States, is sufficient to respond to
plausible crises and contributes to
stability in the region. Such a force level
also provides a sound basis for U.S.
participation in multinational training and
preserves the capability to deter or respond
to larger threats in Europe and to support
limited NATO operations "out of area."

With the end of the Cold War, NATO's mission
is evolving; today NATO plays a crucial role
helping to manage ethnic and national
conflict in Europe. With U.S. leadership,
NATO has provided the muscle behind efforts
to bring about a peaceful settlement in the
former Yugoslavia. NATO air power enforces
the UN—mandated no—fly zone and provides
support to UN peacekeepers. NATO stands
ready to help support the peace once the
parties reach an agreement.

With the adoption of the U.S. initiative,
Partnership for Peace, at the January 1994
summit, NATO is playing an increasingly
important role in our strategy of European
integration, extending the scope of our
security cooperation to the new democracies
of Europe. Twenty—five nations, including
Russia, have already joined the partnership,
which will pave the way for a growing
program of military cooperation and
political consultation. Partner countries
are sending representatives to NATO
headquarters near Brussels and to a military
coordination cell at Mons — the site of
Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers Europe
(SHAPE). Joint exercises have taken place
in Poland and the Netherlands. In keeping
with our strategy of enlargement, PFP is
open to all former members of the Warsaw
Pact as well as other European states. Each
partner will set the scope and pace of its
cooperation with NATO.

The North Atlantic Treaty has always looked
to the addition of members who shared the
Alliance's purposes and its values, its
commitment to respect borders and
international law, and who could add to its
strength; indeed, NATO has expanded three
times since its creation. In January 1994,
President Clinton made it plain that "the
question is no longer whether NATO will take
on new members, but when and how we will do
so." Last December, we and our Allies began
a steady, deliberate, and transparent
process that will lead to NATO expansion.

During 1995, we will come to agreement with
our allies on the process and principles,
and we will share our conclusions with the
members of the Partnership for Peace (PFP).
Once this effort is complete, NATO can turn
to the question of candidates and timing.
Each nation will be considered individually.
No non—member of NATO will have a veto.

Expanding the Alliance will promote our
interests by reducing the risk of
instability or conflict in Europe's eastern
half — the region where two world wars and
the Cold War began. It will help assure
that no part of Europe will revert to a zone
of great power competition or a sphere of

influence. It will build confidence, and
give new democracies a powerful incentive to
consolidate their reforms. And each

potential member will be judged according to
the strength of its democratic institutions
and its capacity to contribute to the goals
of the Alliance.

As the President has made clear, NATO
expansion will not be aimed at replacing one
division of Europe with a new one, but to
enhance the security of all European states,
members and non—members alike. In this
regard, we have a major stake in ensuring
that Russia is engaged as a vital
participant in European security affairs.

We are committed to a growing, healthy
NATO—Russia relationship and want to see
Russia closely involved in the Partnership
for Peace. Recognizing that no single
institution can meet every challenge to
peace and stability in Europe, we have begun
a process that will strengthen the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and enhance its conflict
prevention and peacekeeping capabilities.

The second element of the new strategy for
Europe is economic. The United States seeks
to build on vibrant and open market
economies, the engines that have given us
the greatest prosperity in human history
over the last several decades in Europe and
in the United States. To this end, we
strongly support the process of European
integration embodied in the European Union
and seek to deepen our partnership with the
EU in support of our economic goals, but
also commit ourselves to the encouragement
of bilateral trade and investment in
countries not part of the EU.

The nations of the European Union face
particularly significant economic challenges
with nearly 20 million people unemployed
and, in Germany's case, the extraordinarily
high costs of unification. Among the
Atlantic nations, economic stagnation has
clearly eroded public support in

finances for outward—looking foreign
policies and for greater integration. We
are working closely with our West European
partners to expand employment and promote
long—term growth, building on the results of
the Detroit Jobs Conference and the Naples
G—7 Summit. A White House—sponsored Trade
and Investment Conference for Central and
Eastern Europe took place in Cleveland in
January.

In Northern Ireland, the Administration is
implementing a package of initiatives to
promote the peace process. The Secretary of
Commerce led a Trade and Investment mission
to Belfast in December 1994, and in April
the President will host a White House
Conference in Philadelphia on Trade and
Investment in Northern Ireland.

As we work to strengthen our own economies,
we must know that we serve our own
prosperity and our security by helping the
new market reforms in the new democracies in
Europe's East that will help to deflate the
region's demagogues. It will help ease
ethnic tensions. It will help new
democracies take root.

In Russia, Ukraine and the other new
independent states of the former Soviet
Union, the economic transformation
undertaken will go down as one of the great
historical events of this century. The
Russian Government has made remarkable
progress toward privatizing the economy
(over 50 percent of the Russian Gross
Domestic Product is now generated by the
private sector) and reducing inflation, and
Ukraine has taken bold steps of its own to
institute much needed economic reforms. But
much remains to be done to build on the
reform momentum to assure durable economic
recovery and social protection. President
Clinton has given strong and consistent
support to this unprecedented reform effort,
and has mobilized the international
community to provide structural economic
assistance, for example, securing agreement
by the G—7 to make available four billion
dollars in grants and loans as Ukraine
implemented economic reform.

The short—term difficulties of taking
Central and Eastern Europe into Western
economic institutions will be more than
rewarded if they succeed and if they are
customers for America's and Western Europe's
goods and services tomorrow. That is why
this Administration has been committed to
increase support substantially for market
reforms in the new states of the former
Soviet Union, and why we have continued our
support for economic transition

27

in Central and Eastern Europe, while also
paying attention to measures that can
overcome the social dislocations which have
resulted largely from the collapse of the
Soviet—dominated regional trading system.

Ultimately, the success of market reforms to
the East will depend more on trade than aid.
No one nation has enough resources to
markedly change the future of those
countries as they move to free market
systems. One of our priorities, therefore,
is to reduce trade barriers with the former
communist states.

The third and final imperative of this new
strategy is to support the growth of
democracy and individual freedoms that has
begun in Russia, the nations of the former
Soviet Union and Europe's former communist
states. The success of these democratic
reforms makes us all more secure; they are
the best answer to the aggressive
nationalism and ethnic hatreds unleashed by
the end of the Cold War. Nowhere is
democracy's success more important to us all
than in these countries.

This will be the work of generations. There
will be wrong turns and even reversals, as
there have been in all countries throughout
history. But as long as these states
continue their progress toward democracy and
respect the rights of their own and other
people, that they understand the rights of
their minorities and their neighbors, we
will support their progress with a steady
patience.

East Asia and the Pacific

East Asia is a region of growing importance
for U.S. security and prosperity; nowhere
are the strands of our three pronged
strategy more intertwined, nor is the need
for continued U.S. engagement more evident.
Now more than ever, security, open markets
and democracy go hand in hand in our

approach to this dynamic region. Last year,
President Clinton laid out an integrated
strategy — a New Pacific Community — which

links security requirements with economic
realities and our concern for democracy and
human rights.

In thinking about Asia, we must remember
that security is the first pillar of our new
Pacific community. The United States is a
Pacific nation. We have fought three wars
there in this century. To deter regional
aggression and secure our own interests, we
will maintain an active presence and

28

we will continue to lead. Our deep
bilateral ties with allies such as Japan,
South Korea, Austral, Thailand and the
Philippines, and a continued American
military presence will serve as the
foundation for America's security role in
the region. Currently, our forces number
nearly 100,000 personnel in East Asia. In
addition to performing the general forward
deployment functions outlined above, they
contribute to regional stability by
deterring aggression and adventurism.

As a key element of our strategic commitment
to the region, we are pursuing stronger
efforts to combat the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction on the Korean
Peninsula and in South Asia. In October
1994, we reached an important agreed
framework with North Korea — stopping, and
eventually eliminating, its nuclear weapons
program — and an agreement with China,
limiting its sales of ballistic missiles.

Another example of our security commitment
to the Asia Pacific region in this decade is
our effort to develop multiple new
arrangements to meet multiple threats and
opportunities. We have supported new
regional exchanges — such as the ASEAN
Regional Forum — on the full range of common
security challenges. These arrangements can
enhance regional security and understanding
through dialogue and transparency. These
regional exchanges are grounded on the
strong network of bilateral relationships
that exist today.

The continuing tensions on the Korean
Peninsula remain the principal threat to the
peace and stability of the Asian region. We
have worked assiduously with our South
Korean and Japanese allies, with the
People's Republic of China and with Russia,
and with various UN organizations to resolve
the problem of North Korea's nuclear
program. We have also engaged in extensive
negotiations with the Pyongyang government,
and have worked out an agreed framework for
replacing — over a ten—year period — North
Korea's dangerous, plutonium—producing
reactors with safer light water reactors.
That effort will be accompanied by a
willingness to improve bilateral political
and economic ties with the North,
commensurate with their continued
cooperation to resolve the nuclear issue and
to make progress on other issues of concern.
Our long run objective continues to be a
non—nuclear, peacefully reunified Korean
Peninsula. Our strong and active commitment
to our South Korean allies and to the region
is the foundation of this effort.

We are developing a broader engagement with
the People's Republic of China that will
encompass both our economic and strategic
interests. That policy is best reflected in
our decision to delink China's Most Favored
Nation status from its record on human
rights. We will also facilitate China's
entry into international trade
organizations, such as the General Agreement
on Tariffs and Trade if it undertakes the
necessary obligations. Given its growing
economic potential and already sizable
military force, it is essential that China
not become a security threat to the region.
To that end, we are strongly promoting
China's participation in regional security
mechanisms to reassure its neighbors and
assuage its own security concerns. We have
also broadened our bilateral security
dialogue with the Chinese and we are seeking
to gain further cooperation from China in
controlling the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction. We are also in the early
stages of a dialogue with China on
environmental and health challenges.

The second pillar of our engagement in Asia
is our commitment to continuing and
enhancing the economic prosperity that has
characterized the region. Opportunities for
economic progress continue to abound in
Asia, and underlie our strong commitment to
multilateral economic cooperation,
principally through APEC. Today, the 18
member states of APEC — comprising about
one—third of the world's population —
produce $14 trillion and export $1.7
trillion of goods annually, about one—half
of the world's totals. U.S. exports to APEC
economies reached $300 billion last year,
supporting nearly 2.6 million American jobs.
U.S. investments in the region totaled over
$140 million — about one—third of total U.S.
direct foreign investment. A prosperous and
open Asia Pacific is key to the economic
health of the United States. The first APEC
leaders meeting, hosted by President
Clinton, is vivid testimony to the
possibilities of stimulating regional
economic cooperation as we saw in the recent
APEC leaders statement at the second leaders
meeting that accepted the goal of free trade
within the region by early in the 21st
Century.

We are also working with our major bilateral
trade partners to improve trade relations.
The U.S. and Japan successfully completed a
preliminary accord in September to bring
about the implementation of the 1993
Framework Agreement, designed to open
Japan's markets more to competitive U.S.
goods and reduce the U.S. trade deficit.
Since we delinked China's Most—Favored—
Nation trade status from specific human
rights considerations in May,

U.S.—China trade has grown significantly.

We continue to work closely with Beijing to
resolve remaining bilateral and multilateral
trade problems, such as intellectual
property rights and market access. Unless
the issue of intellectual property rights is
resolved, economic sanctions will be
imposed.

The third pillar of our policy in building a
new Pacific community is to support
democratic reform in the region. The new
democratic states of Asia will have our
strong support as they move forward to
consolidate and expand democratic reforms.

Some have argued that democracy is somehow
unsuited for Asia or at least for some Asian

nations — that human rights are relative and
that they simply mask Western cultural
imperialism. These arguments are wrong. It

is not Western imperialism, but the
aspirations of Asian peoples themselves that
explain the growing number of democracies
and the growing strength of democracy
movements everywhere in Asia. We support
those aspirations and those movements.

Each nation must find its own form of
democracy, and we respect the variety of
democratic institutions that have grown in
Asia. But there is no cultural
justification for torture or tyranny. Nor
do we accept repression cloaked in moral
relativism. Democracy and human rights are
universal yearnings and universal norms,
just as powerful in Asia as elsewhere. We
will continue to press for respect for human
rights in countries as diverse as China and
Burma.

The Western Hemisphere

The Western hemisphere, too, is a fertile
field for a strategy of engagement and
enlargement. Sustained improvements in the
security situation there, including the
resolution of border tensions, control of
insurgencies and containment of pressures
for arms proliferation, will be an essential
underpinning of political and economic
progress in the hemisphere.

The unprecedented triumph of democracy and
market economies throughout the region
offers an unparalleled opportunity to secure
the benefits of peace and stability, and to
promote economic growth and trade. At the
Summit of the Americas, which President
Clinton hosted in

29

December, the 34 democratic nations of the
hemisphere committed themselves for the
first time to the goal of free trade in the
region. They also agreed to a detailed plan
of cooperative action in such diverse fields
as health, education, environmental
protection and the strengthening of
democratic institutions. To assure that
proposals in this plan are implemented, they
called for a series of follow—on ministerial
meetings over the next year and requested
the active participation of the Organization
of American States and the Inter—American
Development Bank. The Summit ushered in a
new era of hemispheric cooperation that
would not have been possible without U.S.
leadership and commitment.

NAFTA, ratified in December 1994, has
strengthened economic ties, with substantial
increases in U.S. exports to both Mexico and
Canada, creating new jobs and new
opportunities for American workers and
business. The United States, Mexico and
Canada have begun discussions to add Chile
to NAFTA .

We remain committed to extending democracy
to all of the region's people still blocked
from controlling their own destinies. Our
overarching objective is to preserve and
defend civilian elected governments and
strengthen democratic practices respectful
of human rights. Working with the
international community, we succeeded in
reversing the coup in Haiti and restoring
the democratically—elected president and
government. Our challenge now is to help
the Haitian people consolidate their
hard—won democracy and rebuild their
country. With the restoration of democracy
in Haiti, Cuba is the only country in the
hemisphere still ruled by a dictator. The
Cuban Democracy Act remains the framework
for our policy toward Cuba; our goal is the
peaceful establishment of democratic
governance for the people of Cuba.

We are working with our neighbors through
various hemispheric organizations, including
the OAS, to invigorate regional cooperation.
Both bilaterally and regionally, we seek to
eliminate the scourge of drug trafficking,
which poses a serious threat to democracy
and security. We also seek to strengthen
norms for defense establishments that are
supportive of democracy, respect for human
rights, and civilian control in defense
matters. Finally, protecting the region's
precious environmental resources is an
important priority.

30

The Middle East, Southwest
and South Asia

The United States has enduring interests in
the Middle East, especially pursuing a
comprehensive breakthrough to Middle East
peace, assuring the security of Israel and
our Arab friends, and maintaining the free
flow of oil at reasonable prices. Our
strategy is harnessed to the unique
characteristics of the region and our vital
interests there, as we work to extend the
range of peace and stability.

We have made solid progress in the past two
years. The President's efforts helped bring
about many historic firsts — the handshake
of peace between Prime Minister Rabin and
Chairman Arafat on the White House lawn has
been followed by the Jordan—Israel peace
treaty, progress on eliminating the Arab
boycott of Israel, and the establishment of
ties between Israel and an increasing number
of its Arab neighbors. But our efforts have
not stopped there; on other bilateral tracks
and through regional dialogue we are working
to foster a durable peace and a
comprehensive settlement, while our support
for economic development can bring hope to
all the peoples of the region.

In Southwest Asia, the United States remains
focused on deterring threats to regional
stability, particularly from Iraq and Iran
as long as those states pose a threat to
U.S. interests, to other states in the
region, and to their own citizens. We have
in place a dual containment strategy aimed
at these two states, and will maintain our
long—standing presence which has been
centered on naval vessels in and near the
Persian Gulf and prepositioned combat
equipment. Since Operation Desert Storm,
temporary deployments of land—based aviation
forces, ground forces and amphibious units
have supplemented our posture in the Gulf
region. Operation Vigilant Warrior
demonstrated our ability to rapidly
reinforce the region in time of crisis.

We have made clear to Iraq it must comply
with all the relevant Security Council
resolutions, and we remain committed to
supporting oppressed minorities in Iraq
through Operations Provide Comfort and

Southern Watch. Our policy is directed not
against the people of Iraq, but against the
aggressive behavior of the government. The

October 1994 deployment, Vigilant Warrior,
demonstrated again the need and our ability
to respond quickly to threats to our allies.

Our policy toward Iran is aimed at changing
the behavior of the Iranian government in
several key areas, including Iran's efforts
to obtain weapons of mass destruction and
missiles, its support for terrorism and
groups that oppose the peace process, its
attempts to undermine friendly governments
in the region and its dismal human rights
record. We remain willing to enter into an
authoritative dialogue with Iran to discuss
the differences between us.

A key objective of our policy in the Gulf is
to reduce the chances that another aggressor
will emerge who would threaten the
independence of existing states. Therefore,
we will continue to encourage members of the
Gulf Cooperation Council to work closely on
collective defense and security
arrangements, help individual GCC states
meet their appropriate defense requirements
and maintain our bilateral defense
agreements.

South Asia has experienced an important
expansion of democracy and economic reform,
and our strategy is designed to help the
peoples of that region enjoy the fruits of
democracy and greater stability through
efforts aimed at resolving long—standing
conflict and implementing confidence
building measures. The United States has
engaged India and Pakistan in seeking
agreement on steps to cap, reduce, and
ultimately eliminate their weapons of mass
destruction and ballistic missile
capabilities. Regional stability and
improved bilateral ties are also important
for America's economic interest in a region
that contains a quarter of the world's
population and one of its most important
emerging markets.

In both the Middle East and South Asia, the
pressure of expanding populations on natural
resources is enormous. Growing
desertification in the Middle East has
strained relations over arable land.
Pollution of the coastal areas in the
Eastern Mediterranean, the Red Sea and the
Gulf of Aqaba has degraded fish catches and
hindered development. Water shortages
stemming from overuse, contaminated water
aquifers and riparian disputes threaten
regional relations. In South Asia, high
population densities and rampant pollution
have exacted a tremendous toll on forests,
biodiversity and the local environment.

Africa

Africa poses one of our greatest challenges
and opportunities to enlarge the community
of market democracies. Throughout Africa,
U.S. policy supports democracy, sustainable
economic development and resolution of
conflicts through negotiation, diplomacy and
peacekeeping. New policies will strengthen
civil societies and mechanisms for conflict
resolution, particularly where ethnic,
religious, and political tensions are acute.
In particular, we will seek to identify and
address the root causes of conflicts and
disasters before they erupt.

The nexus of economic, political, social,
ethnic and environmental challenges facing
Africa can lead to a sense of
"Afro—pessimism." However, if we can
simultaneously address these challenges, we
create a synergy that can stimulate
development, resurrect societies and build
hope. We encourage democratic reform in
nations like Nigeria and Zaire to allow the
people of these countries to enjoy
responsive government. In Mozambique and
Angola, we have played a leading role in
bringing an end to two decades of civil war
and promoting national reconciliation. For
the first time, there is the prospect that
all of southern Africa could enjoy the
fruits of peace and prosperity. Throughout
the continent — in Rwanda, Burundi, Liberia,
Sudan and elsewhere — we work with the UN
and regional organizations to encourage
peaceful resolution of internal disputes.

Last year, South Africa held its first
non—racial elections and created a
Government of National Unity. We remain
committed to addressing the socio—economic
legacies of apartheid to ensure that
democracy fully takes root in South Africa.
During the state visit of Nelson Mandela, we
announced formation of a bilateral
commission to foster new cooperation between
our nations. We must support the revolution
of democracy sweeping the continent — on
center stage in South Africa, and in quieter
but no less dramatic ways in countries like
Malawi, Benin, Niger, and Mali. We need to
encourage the creation of cultures of
tolerance, flowering of civil society and
the protection of human rights and human
dignity.

31

Our humanitarian interventions, along with
the international community, will address
the grave circumstances in several nations
on the continent. USAID‘s new "Greater Horn
of Africa" initiative got ahead of the curve
on a potential famine that threatened 25
million people, and moved beyond relief to
support reconstruction and sustainable

development. In Somalia, our forces broke
through the chaos that prevented the
introduction of relief supplies. U.S.

forces prevented the death of hundreds of
thousands of Somalis and then turned over
the mission to UN peacekeepers from over a
score of nations. In Rwanda, Sudan, Angola
and Liberia, we have taken an active role in
providing humanitarian relief to those
displaced by violence.

Such efforts by the U.S. and the
international community must be limited in
duration and designed to give the peoples of
a nation the opportunity to put their own
house in order. In the final analysis, the
responsibility for the fate of a nation
rests with its own people.

We are also working with regional
organizations, nongovernmental organizations
and governments throughout Africa to address
the urgent issues of population growth,

32

spreading disease (including AIDS),
environmental decline, enhancing the role of
women in development, eliminating support
for terrorism, demobilization of bloated
militaries, relieving burdensome debt, and
expanding trade and investment ties to the
countries of Africa.

Central to all these efforts will be
strengthening the American constituency for
Africa, drawing on the knowledge, experience
and commitment of millions of Americans to
enhance our nation's support for positive
change in Africa. For example, the White
House Conference on Africa, the first such
gathering of regional experts ever sponsored
by the White House, drew together more than
200 Americans from the Administration,
Congress, business, labor, academia,
religious groups, relief and development
agencies, human rights groups and others to
discuss Africa's future and the role that
the United States can play in it. The
President, Vice President, Secretary of
State and National Security Advisor all
participated in the conference, which
produced a wealth of new ideas and new
commitment to Africa.

IV . CONCLUSIONS

The clear and present dangers of the Cold
War made the need for national security
commitments and expenditures obvious to the
American people. Today the task of
mobilizing public support for national
security priorities has become more
complicated. The complex array of new
dangers, opportunities and responsibilities
outlined in this strategy come at a moment
in our history when Americans are
preoccupied with domestic concerns and when
budgetary constraints are tighter than at
any point in the last half century. Yet, in
a more integrated and interdependent world,
we simply cannot be successful in advancing
our interests — political, military and
economic — without active engagement in
world affairs.

While Cold War threats have diminished, our
nation can never again isolate itself from
global developments. Domestic renewal will
not succeed if we fail to engage abroad in
open foreign markets, to promote democracy
in key countries, and to counter and contain
emerging threats.

We are committed to enhancing U.S. national
security in the most efficient and effective
ways possible. We recognize that
maintaining peace and ensuring our national
security in a volatile world are expensive.
The cost of any other course of action,
however, would be immeasurably higher.

Our engagement abroad requires the active,
sustained bipartisan support of the American
people and the U.S. Congress. Of all the
elements contained in this strategy, none is
more important than this: our Administration
is committed to explaining our security
interests and objectives to the nation; to
seeking the broadest possible public and
congressional support for our security
programs and investments; and to exerting
our leadership in the world in a manner that
reflects our best national values and
protects the security of this great and good
nation.

33

