 

A NATIONAL
SEC U RITY

STRATEGY
OF
ENGAGEMENT
AND
ENLARGEMENT

19960807 039

THE WHITE HOUSE
FEBRUARY 1996

DTIC QUALITY INSPECTED I

 

Contents

Preface  i
I. Introduction 1

II. Advancing Our Interests Through

Engagement and Enlargement  11
Enhancing Our Security  12
Maintaining a Strong Defense Capability  13
Major Regional Contingencies  1 4
Overseas Presence  14

Counterterrorism, Fighting Drug
Trafficking and Other Missions  1 5

Combating Terrorism  15
Fighting Drug Trafficking  1 6
Other Missions  17

Deciding When and How to Employ
U.S. Forces  18

Combating the Spread and Use of
Weapons of Mass Destruction
and Missiles  19

Nonproliferation and
Counterproliferation  19

Nuclear Forces  21
Arms Control  21
Peace Operations  22
Strong Intelligence Capabilities  23
Fighting International Organized Crime  25
National Security Emergency Preparedness  26

The Environment and Sustainable
Development  26

Promoting Prosperity at Home  26

Enhancing American Competitiveness  27

Strengthening Macroeconomic Coordination  27
Enhancing Access to Foreign Markets  27
Export Strategy and Advocacy Program  27
Export Controls  27
Expanding the Realm of Open Markets  28

The North American Free Trade
Agreement  28

Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation  28
Uruguay Round of GATT  28

U.S. — Japan Framework Agreement  29
Summit of the Americas  29

U.S. — EU Transatlantic Marketplace  29

OECD Multilateral Investment
Agreement  29

Preparing International Economic
Institutions for the 21st Century  29

Providing for Energy Security  30

Promoting Sustainable Development
Abroad  30

Promoting Democracy  32

III. Integrated Regional Approaches  35
Europe and Eurasia  35
East Asian and the Pacific  39
The Western Hemisphere  41

The Middle East, Southwest and
South Asia  42

Africa  43

IV. Conclusions  45

Preface

Protecting our nation's security — our people, our territory
and our way of life — is my Administration's foremost
mission and constitutional duty. America's security impera-
tives, however, have fundamentally changed. The central
security challenge of the past half century — the threat of
communist expansion — is gone. The dangers we face
today are more diverse. Ethnic conflict is spreading and
rogue states pose a serious danger to regional stability in
many corners of the globe. The proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction represents a major challenge to our secu-
rity. Large-scale environmental degradation, exacerbated
by rapid population growth, threatens to undermine polit-
ical stability in many countries and regions. And the threat
to our open and free society from the organized forces of
terrorism, international crime and drug trafficking is greater
as the technological revolution, which holds such promise,
also empowers these destructive forces with novel means
to challenge our security. These threats to our security
have no respect for boundaries and it is clear that
American security in the 21st Century will be determined
by the success of our response to forces that operate within
as well as beyond our borders.

At the same time, we have unprecedented opportunities to
make our nation safer and more prosperous. Our militaw
might is unparalleled. We now have a truly global
economy linked by an instantaneous communications
network, which offers increasing opportunities for
American jobs and American investment. The community
of democratic nations is growing, enhancing the prospects
for political stability, peaceful conflict resolution, and
greater dignity and hope for the people of the world. The
international community is beginning to act together to
address pressing global environmental needs.

Never has American leadership been more essential — to
navigate the shoals of the world's new dangers and to
capitalize on its opportunities. American assets are unique:
our military strength, our dynamic economy, our powerful
ideals and, above all, our people. We can and must make
the difference through our engagement; but our involve-
ment must be carefully tailored to serve our interests and
priorities.

This report, submitted in accordance with Section 603 of
the Goldwater-Nichols Defense Department
Reorganization Act of 1986, elaborates a national security
strategy that is tailored for this new era and builds upon
America's unmatched strengths. Focusing on new threats
and new opportunities, its central goals are:

' To enhance our security with militaw forces that are
ready to fight and with effective representation
abroad.

' To bolster America's economic revitalization.
- To promote democracy abroad.

Over the past three years, my Administration has worked
diligently to pursue these goals. This national security
strategy report presents the strategy that has guided this
effort. It is premised on a belief that the line between our
domestic and foreign policies is disappearing — that we
must revitalize our economy if we are to sustain our mili-
tary forces, foreign initiatives and global influence, and
that we must engage actively abroad if we are to open
foreign markets and create jobs for our people.

We believe that our goals of enhancing our security,
bolstering our economic prosperity and promoting democ-
racy are mutually supportive. Secure nations are more

Ii kely to support free trade and maintain democratic struc-
tures. Free market nations with growing economies and
strong and open trade ties are more likely to feel secure
and to work toward freedom. And democratic states are
less likely to threaten our interests and more likely to coop-
erate with the United States to meet security threats and
promote free trade and sustainable development. These
goals are supported by ensuring America remains engaged
in the world and by enlarging the community of secure,
free market and democratic nations.

As the boundaries between threats that start outside our
borders and the challenges from within are diminishing,
the problems others face today can more quickly become
ours, tomorrow. This is why U.S. leadership and our
engagement have never been more important: if we with-
draw from this world today, our citizens will have to pay
the price ofour neglect. We therefore measure the success
of our efforts abroad, as at home, by one simple standard:
Have we made the lives of the American people safer,
today; have we made tomorrow better and more secure for
our children?

Since my Administration began, we have been deeply
engaged in efforts to realize this measure of success by
meeting the goals of our strategy:

- To enhance our security, for example, we have
helped achieve peace between Jordan and Israel and
an Interim Agreement between Israel and the
Palestinians in the Middle East; brokered a compre-
hensive peace agreement in Bosnia and successfully
deterred the spread of conflict to the Former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; established
NATO's Partnership for Peace and initiated a process
that will lead to NATO's enlargement; concluded an
agreement with Russia to detarget ICBMs and SLBMs;
secured the accession of Ukraine, Kazakstan, and
Belarus to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT)
and their agreement to eliminate nuclear weapons
from their territory, which in turn opened the door to
the ratification and entry into force of the START I
Treaty and Senate advice and consent to the ratifica-
tion of the START II Treaty; led successful interna-
tional efforts to secure the indefinite and uncondi-
tional extension of the NPT; initiated negotiations on

a comprehensive test ban treaty (CTBT), which we
hope to conclude in 1996; participated in an
unprecedented regional security gathering of the
ASEAN countries and others, including Russia and
Vietnam; reached an Agreed Framework with North
Korea that halted, and will eventually eliminate, its
dangerous nuclear program; and used our diplo-
matic support and the power of our example to give
new impetus to the efforts of the people of Northern
Ireland and the British and Irish governments to
achieve a just and lasting settlement to the conﬂict
there.

- To bolster prosperity at home and around the world,
we have secured the enactment of legislation imple-
menting both the North American Free Trade
Agreement (NAFTA) and the Uruguay Round of the
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT);
completed over 80 separate trade agreements;
actively engaged China on trade issues through
extension of its Most Favored Nation status and
vigorous pursuit of China's adherence to the rules-
based regime of the World Trade Organization;
worked to open Asia-Pacific markets through three
leaders meetings of the Asia Pacific Economic
Cooperation forum; lowered export controls; and
held a Western Hemisphere Summit in Miami where
the 34 democratic nations of this hemisphere
committed themselves to negotiate a free-trade
agreement by 2005.

- To promote democracy, we have supported South
Africa's recent transformation; provided aid to a
democratizing Russia and other new independent
states of the former Soviet Union as well as Central
and Eastern European nations; assisted Cambodia;
advocated improvements in human rights globally
through the UN urging that the rule of law replace
the rule of oppressive regimes; and worked with our
Western Hemisphere neighbors restoring the democ-
ratically elected government in Haiti and hosting the
Summit of the Americas, which reaffirmed and
strengthened our mutual commitment to democracy.

Our extraordinaw diplomatic leverage to reshape existing
security and economic structures and create new ones ulti-
mately relies upon American power. Our economic and
militaw might, as well as the power of our ideals, also
makes America's diplomats the ﬁrst among equals and

enables us to help create the conditions necessary for U.S.
interests to thrive. Our economic strength gives us a posi-
tion of advantage on almost every global issue. For
instance, our efforts in South Africa and our negotiations
with North Korea demonstrate how the imposition — or
the threat — of economic sanctions helps us to achieve
our objectives as part of our determined diplomacy. That
determined diplomacy also is reflected in our consistent
effort to engage in productive relations with China across a
broad range of issues, including regional security, nonpro-
liferation, human rights and trade. We seek a strategic rela-
tionship with China, advancing our own national interests
in key areas. It is this steady approach — asserting
America's core national security interests while keeping in
mind longer-term goals — that is the hallmark of deter-
mined diplomacy.

But military force remains an indispensable element of our
nation's power. Our nation must maintain military forces
sufficient to deter diverse threats and, when necessary, to
fight and win against our adversaries. While many factors
ulti mately contribute to our nation's safety and well-being,
no single component is more important than the men and
women who wear America's uniform and stand sentry
over our security. Their skill, service and dedication consti-
tute the core of our defenses. Today our military is the
best-equipped, best-trained and best-prepared fighting
force in the world. Time after time in the last three years,
our troops demonstrated their continued readiness and
strength: moving with lightning speed to head off another
Iraqi threat to Kuwait; helping to save hundreds of thou-
sands of lives in Rwanda; giving freedom and democracy
back to the people of Haiti; and helping enforce UN
mandates in the former Yugoslavia and subsequently
deploying forces under NATO command to help imple-
ment the peace agreement in Bosnia. I am committed to
ensuring that this military capability is not compromised.

The United States recognizes that we have a special
responsibility that goes along with being a great power
and, at times, our global interests and ideals lead us to
oppose those who would endanger the survival or well-
being of their peaceful neighbors. At the same time, all
nations should be able to expect that their borders and
their sovereignty will always be secure; however, this does
not mean we orthe international community must tolerate
gross violations of human rights within those borders.

When our national security interests are threatened, we
will, as America always has, use diplomacy when we can,

but force if we must. We will act with others when we
can, but alone when we must. We recognize, however,
that while force can defeat an aggressor, it cannot solve
underlying problems. Democracy and economic prosperity
can take root in a struggling society only through local
solutions carried out by the society itself. We must use
militaw force selectively, recognizing that it use may do
no more than provide a window of opportunity for a
society — and diplomacy — to work.

We therefore will send American troops abroad only when
our interests and our values are sufﬁciently at stake. The
courage, loyalty and willingness of our men and women in
uniform to put their lives at risk is a national treasure
which should never be taken for granted, but neither
should we fear to employ U.S. military forces wisely.
When we do so, it will be with clear objectives to which
we are firmly committed and which — when combat is
likely — we have the means to achieve decisively. To do
otherwise, risks those objectives and endangers our troops.
These requirement are as pertinent for humanitarian and
other nontraditional interventions today as they were for
previous generations during prolonged world wars.
Modern media communications may now bring to our
homes both the suffering that exists in many parts of the
world and the casualties that may accompany interven-
tions to help. But no deployment of American service
members is risk-free, and we must remain clear in our
purpose and resolute in its execution. And while we must
continue to reassess the cost and benefit of any operation
as it unfolds, reflexive calls for withdrawal of our forces
when casualties are incurred would simply encourage
rogue actors to try to force our departure from areas where
there are U.S. interests by attacking American troops.

During the past three years, diplomacy backed by
American power has produced impressive results:

- When Iraq moved forces towards Kuwait, we reacted
swiftly and dispatched additional, la.rge—scale forces
to the region under the authority of the United
Nations — but were prepared to act alone, if neces-
sary.

- In Haiti, it was only when the Haitian military
learned that the 82nd Airborne Division was en route
that we achieved peacefully what we were prepared
to do under fire.

iii

- In Bosnia, we achieved a breakthrough when U.S.
diplomatic leadership was married to appropriate
military power. After the fall of Zepa and Srebrenica,
the United States secured an agreement from our
NATO allies to meet further assaults on the UN safe
areas with a decisive military response. American
pilots participated in the NATO bombing campaign
following the shelling of a Sarajevo marketplace,
demonstrating our resolve and helping to bring the
pa_rties to the negotiating table.

U.S. leadership then seized the opportunity for peace
that these developments created: U.S. diplomats,
along with our Contact Group partners, brokered a
cease—fire and, after intensive U.S.—led negotiations in
Dayton, Ohio, a comprehensive peace agreement.
U.S. forces a_re now working as pa.rt of a la.rger
NATO force — joined by forces from members of
NATO's Partnership for Peace — to help implement
the military aspects of the agreement and create the
conditions for peace to take hold.

- In Rwanda and Somalia, only the American military
could have accomplished what it did in these
humanitarian missions, saving hundreds of thousands
of lives. However, over the longer run our interests
were served by turning these operations over to
multilateral peacekeeping forces once the immediate
humanitarian crisis was addressed. No outside force
can create a stable and legitimate domestic order for
another society — that work can only be accom-
plished by the society itself.

Our national security strategy reﬂects both America's inter-
ests and our values. Our commitment to freedom, equality
and human dignity continues to serve as a beacon of hope
to peoples around the world. The vitality, creativity and
diversity of American society are important sources of
national strength in a global economy increasingly driven
by information and ideas.

Our prospects in this new era are promising. The specter of
nuclear annihilation has dramatically receded. The historic
events of the past three years — including the handshake
between Israel and the PLO, the peace treaty between
Israel and Jordan, the transformation of South Africa to a
multiracial democracy headed by President Mandela and
the peace agreement to end the war in Bosnia — suggest
this era's possibilities for achieving security, prosperity and
democracy.

Our nation can only address this era's dangers and oppor-
tunities if we remain actively engaged in global affairs. We
are the world's greatest power, and we have global inter-
ests as well as responsibilities. As our nation learned after
World War I, we can find no security for America in isola-
tionism nor prosperity in protectionism. Forthe American
people to be safer and enjoy expanding opportunities, our
nation must work to deter would-be aggressors, open
foreign markets, promote the spread of democracy abroad,
combat transnational dangers of terrorism, drug trafficking
and international crime, encourage sustainable develop-
ment and pursue new opportunities for peace.

Our national security requires the patient application of
American will and resources. We can only sustain that
necessary investment with the broad, bipartisan support of
the American people and their representatives in Congress.
The full participation of Congress is essential to the success
of our continuing engagement, and I will consult with
members of Congress at every step as we formulate and
Implement American foreign policy.

The need for American leadership abroad remains as
strong as ever. I am committed to forging a new public
consensus to sustain our active engagement abroad in
pursuit of our cherished goal — a more secure world
where democracy and free markets know no borders. This
document details that commitment.

1444-AAA ttAAA-4--clAAL..

I. Introduction

When this Administration assumed office, the United States
and its allies faced a radically transformed security envi-
ronment. The primary security imperative of the past half
century — containing communist expansion while
preventing nuclear war — was gone. Instead, we
confronted a complex array of new and old security chal-
lenges America had to meet as we approached the 21st
century.

The Administration outlined a national security strategy
that assessed America's role in this new international
context and described a strategy to advance our interests at
home and abroad.

The strategy recognized that the United States was facing a
period of great promise but also great uncertainty. We
stand as the world's preeminent power. America's core
value of freedom, as embodied in democratic governance
and market economics, has gained ground around the
world. Hundreds of millions of people have thrown off
communism, dictatorship or apartheid. Former adversaries
now work with us in diplomacy and global problem
solving. Both the threat of a war among great powers and
the specter of nuclear annihilation have receded dramati-
cally. The dynamism of the global economy is trans-
forming commerce, culture and global politics, promising
greater prosperity for America and greater cooperation
among nations.

At the same time, troubling uncertainties and clear threats
remain. The new, independent states that replaced the
Soviet Union continue to experience wrenching economic
and political transitions, while the progress of the many
new democracies of Central and Eastern Europe is still

fragile. While our relations with the other great powers are
as constructive as at any point in this century, Russia's
historic transformation will face difficult challenges, and
China maintains an authoritative regime even as that
country assumes a more important economic and political
role in global affairs. The spread of weapons of mass
destruction poses serious threats, and rogue states still
threaten regional aggression. Violent extremists threaten
fragile peace processes in many parts of the world.
Worldwide, there is a resurgence of militant nationalism as
well as ethnic and religious conflict. This has been demon-
strated by the upheavals in Bosnia, Rwanda and Somalia,
where the United States has participated in peacekeeping
and humanitarian missions.

The strategy also recognized that a number of transna-
tional problems which once seemed quite distant, like
environmental degradation, natural resource depletion,
rapid population growth and refugee flows, now pose
threats to our prosperity and have security implications for
both present and long-term American policy. In addition,
the emergence of the information and technology age
present new challenges to U.S. strategy even as it offers
extraordinaw opportunities to build a better future. This
technology revolution brings our world closer together as
information, money and ideas move around the globe at
record speed; but it also makes possible for the violence of
terrorism, organized crime and drug trafficking to chal-
lenge the security of our borders and that of our citizens in
new ways.

It is a world where clear distinctions between threats to
our nation's security from beyond our borders and the
challenges to our security from within our borders are

being blurred; where the separation between international
problems and domestic ones is evaporating; and where the
line between domestic and foreign policy is eroding. The
demise of communism not only lifted the lid on age-old
conflicts but it opened the door to new dangers, such as
the spread of weapons of mass destruction to non-state, as
well as state, forces. And it did so at a time when these
forces can now try to threaten our security from within our
borders because of their access to modern technology. We
must therefore assess these forces for what they are, with
our response based on the nature of theirthreat, notjust
where they occur.

Because problems that start beyond our borders can now
much more easily become problems within them,
American leadership and engagement in the world has
never been more important. There is also a simple truth
about this new world: the same idea that was under attack
three times in this century — first by imperialism and then
by fascism and communism — remains under attack
today, but on many fronts at once. It is an idea that comes
under many names _ democracy, liberty, civility,
pluralism — but which together are the values of a society
where leaders and governments preserve individual free-
doms and ensure opportunity and human dignity. As the
President has said, "We face a contest as old as history —
a struggle between freedom and tyranny; between toler-
ance and isolation. It is a fight between those who would
build free societies governed by laws and those who
would impose their will by force. Our struggle today, in a
world more high-tech, more fast-moving, more chaotically
diverse than ever, is the age-old fight between hope and
fear." Just as surely as fascism and communism once did,
so, too, are our freedom, democracy, security and pros-
perity now threatened by regional aggressors and the
spread of weapons of mass destruction; ethnic, religious
and national rivalries; and the forces of terrorism, drug traf-
ficking and international organized crime. Today,
addressing these threat demands American leadership.

The victors of World War I squandered their triumph in
this age-old struggle when they turned inward, bringing on
a global depression and allowing fascism to rise, and
reigniting global war. After World War II, we remembered
the lessons of the past. in the face of a new totalitarian
threat, this great nation did not walk away from the chal-
lenge of the moment. Instead, it chose to reach out, to
rebuild international security structures and to lead. This
determination of previous generations to prevail over

communism by shaping new international structures left us
a world stronger, safer and freer. It is this example and its
success that now inspire us to continue the difficult task of
a new stage in this old struggle: to secure the peace won in
the Cold War against those who would still deny people
their human rights, terrorists who threaten innocents and
pariah states who choose repression and extremism over
openness and moderation.

By exerting our leadership abroad, we make America safer
and more prosperous — by deterring aggression, by
fostering the peaceful resolution of dangerous conflicts, by
opening foreign markets, by helping democratic regimes
and by tackling global problems. V\ﬁthout our active lead-
ership and engagement abroad, threats will fester and our
opportunities will narrow. We seekto be as creative and
constructive — in the literal sense of that word — as the
generation of the late 1940's. For all its dangers, this new
world presents an immense opportunity — the chance to
adapt and construct global institutions that will help to
provide security and increase economic growth for
America and the world.

At issue is whether our efforts at this construction can
continue to succeed in the face of shifting threats to the
ideals and habits of democracy. It is therefore in our
interest that democracy be at once the foundation and the
purpose of the international structures we build through
this constructive diplomacy: the foundation, because the
institutions will be a reflection of their shared values and
norms; the purpose, because if political and economic
institutions are secure, democracy will flourish.

Promoting democracy does more than foster our ideals. It
advances our interests because we know that the larger the
pool of democracies, the better off we, and the entire
community of nations, will be. Democracies create free
markets that offer economic opportunity, make for more
reliable trading partners and are far less likely to wage war
on one another. While democracy will not soon take hold
everywhere, it is in our interest to do all that we can to
enlarge the community of free and open societies, espe-
cially in areas of greatest strategic interest, as in Central
and Eastern Europe and the new independent states of the
former Soviet Union.

Our national security strategy is therefore based on
enlarging the community of market democracies while
deterring and limiting a range of threats to our nation, our

allies and our interests. The more that democracy and
political and economic liberalization take hold in the
world, particularly in countries of strategic importance to
us, the safer our nation is likely to be and the more our
people are likely to prosper.

To that broad end, the three central components of our
strategy of engagement and enlargement are: (1) our effort
to enhance our security by maintaining a strong defense
capability and employing effective diplomacy to promote
cooperative security measures; (2) our work to open
foreign markets and spur global economic growth; and (3)
our promotion of democracy abroad. It also explains how
we are pursuing these elements of our strategy in specific
regions by adapting and constructing institutions that will
help to provide security and increase economic growth
throughout the world.

In a democracy, however, the foreign policy and security
strategy of the nation must serve the needs of the people.
The preamble of the Constitution sets out the basic objec-
tives:

providefor the common defence, promote the
general welfare, and secure the blessings of liberty to
ourselves and ourposterity.

The end of the Cold War does not alter these fundamental
purposes. Nor does it reduce the need for active American
efforts, here and abroad, to pursue those goals. Our efforts
to advance the common good at home depend upon our
efforts to advance our interests around the world.
Therefore, we mustjudge the success of our security
strategy by its impact on the domestic lives of our citizens:
has it made a real difference in the day to day lives of
Americans? Considerjust a few examples:

Every American today is safer because we are stepping
back from the nuclear precipice. Russian missiles are no
longer targeted at the United States and we have
convinced Ukraine, Kazakstan and Belarus to give up
nuclear weapons left on their land when the Soviet Union
collapsed. American leadership secured the indefinite and
unconditional extension of the Nuclear Proliferation Treaty
and we convinced North Korea to freeze its nuclear
program. Our strategy also continues to ensure the safe-
guarding of more nuclear materials so they do not fall into
the hands of terrorists or international criminals and
endanger our citizens.

In a world where the boundaries between threats outside
our borders and the challenges from within are dimin-
ishing, Americans are safer because our counterterrorism
strategy promoted closer cooperation with foreign govern-
ment and sanctions against states that sponsor terrorism,
while increasing the resources for our own law enforce-
ment agencies.

Large-scale migration from Haiti has been stemmed
because we gave democracy another chance in that
nation. In the months before we forced the military rulers
to step down, 16,000 Haitians fled their country for our
shores and elsewhere in the region. Three months after the
intervention, the refugee flow was practically zero.

Our strategy to help the nations of Central Europe consoli-
date democracy, find lasting security and build strong
economics makes it much less likely that Americans might
have to ﬁght another war on the battlegrounds of Europe.
By supporting democratic reform and the transition to free
markets in the new independent states of the former Soviet
Union and in Central Europe, our strategy promoted
stability and prosperity in an area that will become a vast
market for the United States, creating jobs in America. In
Bosnia, diplomatic determination combined with military
muscle to create an opportunity to secure a peace rather
than permit instability to undermine this fragile region and
U.S. interest.

Our strategy's trade initiatives, from NAFTA and the
Uruguay Round of GATT to over 80 separate trade agree-
ments, have created more than two million American jobs.
With the Summit of the Americas and the APEC process,
U.S. exports — and jobs — will continue to grow. Because
of our emergency assistance to Mexico during its financial
crisis, economic growth — although fragile — has returned
and exports now exceed pre-NAFTA levels. Mexico has
begun repaying its debt to the United States ahead of
schedule, protecting the nearly 310,000 American jobs
NAFTA has already created because of exports to our
partners.

From Iraq to Haiti, South Africa to the Korean Peninsula,
the Middle East to Northern Ireland, our strategy has
stopped or prevented war and brought former adversaries
together in peace because it is in our interest. These efforts,
combined with assisting developing nations who are
fighting overpopulation, AIDS, drug smuggling and envi-
ronmental degradation, ensure that future generations of

Americans will not have to contend with the consequences
of neglecting these threats to our security and prosperity.

Many of these decisions were made in the face of signifi-
cant disagreement over what needed to be done at the
moment. But the alternatives bore unacceptable cost to
our citizens: tariffs and harriers would still cripple the
world trading system if not for GAI t and NAF I A; the
Persian Gulf region would be very different today if the
rapid response of the United States and its allies had not
deterred Iraq's threatened aggression against Kuwait in

I 994; the flood of Haitian refugees at our borders would
have continued had we not intervened in that country;
Latin America would have seen financial and economic
chaos affecting its fragile democracies, and U.S. trade
would have been harmed, had we not moved to help
stabilize Mexico's economy; and the dangers to our people
from weapons of mass destruction would be much greater
had our strategy not reduced the threat of nuclear arms,
curbed the spread of chemical and biological weapons
around the world and countered the terrorists and crimi-
nals who would endanger us if they possessed these
weapons. The money we devoted to development, peace-
keeping or disaster relief helped to avert future crises
whose cost would have been far greater in terms of lives
lost and resources spent.

We can continue to engage actively abroad to achieve
these results only if the American people and the Congress
are willing to bear the costs of that leadership — in dollars,
political energy and, at times, American lives. U.S. secu-
rity, prosperity and freedom are neither cost- nor risk-free;
resources must be spent and casualties may be incurred.
One purpose of this report is to help foster the broad,
bipartisan understanding and support necessary to sustain
our international engagement. A coalition of the center
through bipartisan congressional participation is critical to
this commitment. Some decisions must be made in the
face of opposition; these decisions must ultimately be
judged as to whether they benefited the American people
by advancing their interests of security, prosperity and
democracy in the long run.

During the first three years of this Administration, this
strategy has produced the following results with respect to
our security requirements:

' At the President's direction, the Pentagon conducted
the Bottom Up Review and Nuclear Posture Review,

assessing what defense forces and capabilities our
nation needs for this new security era. The
Administration's defense strategy, which requires
U.S. forces to be able to deter and, if necessary,
defeat aggression in concert with regional allies in
two nearly simultaneous major regional conﬂicts, has
proved realistic. In the late summer of 1994, we
faced the very real prospect of near—simultaneous
hostilities with North Korea and Iraq. Our rapid rein-
forcement of U.S. military presence and additional
deployments to these theaters deterred potential
aggression. Our military's superb performance in
responding quickly and effectively when called upon
in these crises, as well as in those in Haiti and
Rwanda that sarne year, clearly demonstrates their
continued readiness to respond as needed and that
we have prudently managed the post—Cold War force
drawdown.

The President also set forth a defense budget for
Fiscal Yea.rs 1996-2001 which fully funds the force
structure recommended by the Bottom Up and
Nuclear Posture Reviews and which is necessary to
carry out the national security strategy. He repeatedly
stressed that he will draw the line against further cuts
that would undermine that force structure or erode
U.S. military readiness. The President also requested
Congress to enact supplemental appropriations of
$1.7 billion for FY 1994 and $ 2.6 billion for FY
1995 to ensure readiness would not be impaired by
the costs of unanticipated contingencies. In addition,
the President added $25 billion to the Fiscal Year
1996-2001 defense spending plan to provide more
funding for readiness, modernization and quality of
life improvements for our military personnel and
families. The President also agreed to extra funding in
the FY 1996 Defense appropriations bill in order to
pay for the troop deployment in Bosnia.

The United States initiated an intense diplomatic
effort that forged a Bosnia—wide cease—fire and then
brokered a comprehensive peace agreement among
the parties. We contributed a substantial share of the
NATO—led peace implementation force to help
Implement the military aspects of the peace agree-

ment and create the conditions for peace to take
hold.

- At President Clinton's initiative, a NATO Summit in

January 1994 approved the Partnership For Peace
(PFP) program and initiated a process that will lead
to NATO's gradual enlargement to ensure that the
alliance is prepared to meet the European and
transatlantic security challenges of this era, and to
provide the security relationships that will buttress
the underpinnings forthe democratic and market
economic gains in Europe since 1989. Since the
Summit, 27 countries, including Russia, agreed to
join the Partnership for Peace, and Partner countries
are now working with NATO in Bosnia. In 1995,
NATO completed work on its enlargement study and
presented it to the Partners. This year, in the second
phase of the enlargement process, NATO will begin
intensive bilateral consultations with all the PFP
members who wish to participate, aimed at helping
them prepare for possible NATO membership.

The United States, Russia, Ukraine, Belarus and
Kazakstan exchanged instruments of ratiﬁcation for
the START I Treaty at the December 1994 summit of
the Conference on Security and Cooperation in
Europe (CSCE), culminating two years of intensive
U.S. diplomatic efforts to bring the Treaty into force
and paving the way for ratification of the 1993
START II Treaty. START I requires the permanent
elimination of bombers, ICBM silos and ballistic
missile submarine launch tubes that carried over
9,000 of the 21,000 total accountable warheads the
United States and the former Soviet Union declared
when the Treaty was signed — a reduction of 40
percent. START II, which the Senate voted 87-4 to
give its advice and consent to ratification on January
26, 1996, will eliminate additional U.S. and Russian
strategic launchers and will effectively remove an
additional 5,000 deployed warheads, leaving each
side with no more than 3,500. These actions will
reduce the deployed strategic force arsenals of the
United States and Russia by two-thirds. President
Clinton and Yeltsin have agreed that once START II is
ratified by both countries, the United States and
Russia will begin immediately to deactivate all
strategic nuclear delivery systems to be reduced
under the Treaty by removing their nuclear warheads
or taking other steps to take them out of combat
status, thus removing thousands of warheads from
alert status years ahead of schedule. The two
Presidents also directed an intensification of dialogue

regarding the possibility of further reductions of, and
limitations on, remaining nuclear forces.

The 30-nation Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE)
Treaty's reduction period came to an end this past
November, resulting in the elimination of over
50,000 pieces of heavy militaw equipment and
capping conventional forces in Europe at their lowest
levels in decades. Together with our allies, the
Administration will continue to pursue full imple-
mentation of this agreement.

The President launched a comprehensive policy to
combat the proliferation of weapons of mass destruc-
tion and the missiles that deliver them. The United
States has secured landmark commitment to elimi-
nate all nuclear weapons from Ukraine, Belarus and
Kazakstan, and in December 1994, Ukraine formally
acceded to the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty as a
non-nuclear weapon state, as Kazakstan and Belarus
had done previously. By the end of 1995, all nuclear
weapons had been removed from Kazakstan, most
were out of Belarus and a significant number had
been transferred from Ukraine. The United States led
the successful international effort to extend the NPT
indefinitely and without conditions by consensus of
Treaty parties at the 1995 Review and Extension
Conference. The President's August 1995 initiative to
support a true zero yield Comprehensive Test Ban
Treaty (CTBT) provided a significant boost to the
CTBT negotiations and has opened the doorto
completing and signing a CTBT in 1996.

We also made significant progress during the past
year in negotiations to establish an agreed demarca-
tion between strategic and theater ballistic missiles
that will update the ABM Treaty and advance our
goal of deploying advanced theater missile defenses.
The Administration also submitted the Chemical
Weapons Convention to the Senate for its advice and
consent to ratification and supported the develop-
ment of new measures to strengthen the Biological
Weapons Convention.

The Administration reached an important Agreed
Framework with North Korea that has halted and,
when fully implemented, will eventually eliminate
that country's existing, dangerous nuclear program,
greatly enhancing regional stability and advancing

our nonproliferation goals. The Administration
reached agreements with Russia, Ukraine and South
Africa to control missile—related technology, brought
Russia, Brazil and South Africa into the Missile
Technology Control Regime (MTCR) and secured
China's commitment not to transfer MTCR—
controlled, ground—to—ground missiles. The United
States has also led international efforts to create the
multilateral "Wassenaa.r Arrangement on Export
Controls for Conventional Arms and Dual—use Goods
and Technology" — the successor to the
Coordinating Committee for East—West Trade
(COCOM) — to provide a regime for transparency
and restraint on dangerous transfers of conventional
arms and dual—use technologies.

The President's efforts helped bring about many
historic firsts in the Middle East peace process — the
handshake of peace between Prime Minister Rabin
and Chairman Arafat on the White House lawn has
been followed by the Jordan-Israel peace treaty, the
Israel-Palestinian Interim Agreement, progress on
eliminating the Arab boycott of Israel and the estab-
lishment of ties between Israel and an increasing
number of its Arab neighbors.

In 1995, the President proposed legislation to provide
law enforcement officials with increased tools to
combat terrorism. These include additional
manpower and training, methods to mark and trace
explosives and legal mobile wiretaps. The President
also directed new initiatives against money-|aun-
dering, for seizing the assets of drug rings and for
new legislation to respond more effectively to orga-
nized crime activity. In October, the President also
announced at the United Nations an invitation to
every country to join in negotiating an international
declaration on citizens’ security that would include:
a no-sanctuary pledge for organized criminals, terror-
ist, drug traffickers and smugglers; a counterter-
rorism pact; a pledge to end the trafficking of illegal
arms and of lethal nuclear, biological and chemical
materials; an antinarcotics pledge; and an effective
police force partnership to help combat these forces
of violence and destruction. Progress has been made,
with the apprehension of leaders of the most influen-
tial South American drug cartels.

In March 1995, the President obtained Senate advice
and consent to ratification of the 1980 Convention
on Conventional Weapons (CCW), which constrains
the use of certain weapons, including landmines.
The Administration is also pursuing a comprehensive
set of initiatives to address the global landmine crisis,
such as strengthening the CCW provisions governing
landmine use, placing international controls on
export, production and stockpiles, and developing
new equipment for more effective demining.

On May 3, 1994, President Clinton signed a
Presidential Decision Directive establishing 'U.S.
Policy on Reforming Multilateral Peace Operations.’
This policy represented the first comprehensive
framework for U.S. decision making on issues of
peacekeeping and peace enforcement suited to the
realities of the new international era.

In October 1994, President Clinton transmitted the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea to
the Senate for its advice and consent to ratification.
This was the culmination of years of negotiations to
ensure an equitable balance between the rights of
coastal states to control activities in adjacent,
offshore areas to protect their economic, security and
environmental interests and the rights of maritime
states to free and unimpeded navigation and over-
flight of the oceans of the world. This included an
acceptable regime to administer the mineral
resources of the deep seabed, thereby protecting
U.S. interests.

In March 1995, President Clinton ordered a
sweeping reexamination ofthe U.S. Government's
approach to putting science and technology to the
service of national security and global stability in
light of the changed security environment, increasing
global economic competition and growing budgetary
pressures. The resulting National Security Science
and Technology Strategy is the country's first
comprehensive Presidential statement of national
security science and technology priorities.

On the economic front, Adrninistration policies have

created nearly 7.5 million American jobs and established

the foundation for the global economy of the 21st Century:

- The President worked with the Congress on effective

measures to reduce the federal budget deficit and
restore economic growth. These measures help
increase our competitiveness and strengthen our
position in negotiations with other nations. Two
million of the 7.5 million newjobs created in the last
three years are a result of our efforts to expand
market access for American product overseas. These
efforts have also lead to the creation of over 3

million new small businesses and the lowest
combined rates of unemployment and inflation in 25
years. The federal budget deficit has dropped three
years in a row, from $290 billion to $164 billion a
year

The President secured approval of the North
American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), which
creates the world's largest free trade zone and has
already created nearly 310,000 American jobs. The
vote for NAFTA marked a decisive U.S. afﬁrmation
of its international engagement. Through NAFTA's
environmental and labor side agreements, we are
working actively to protect the rights of workers and
to reduce air and water pollution that crosses
national boundaries. When Mexico came under
short-term financial pressures in December 1994, the
United States tookthe lead in marshaling interna-
tional support to assist the country in meeting this
challenge. NAFTA helped to protect and increase
U.S. exports to that country — and the jobs they
support — during the financial crisis and the subse-
quent adjustment period. We have also begun nego-
tiations with Chile to join NAFTA.

The Administration stood at the forefront of a multi-
lateral effort to achieve history's most extensive
market-opening agreements in the GATT Uruguay-
round negotiations on world trade. Working with a
bipartisan coalition in the Congress, the President
secured approval of this path-breaking agreement
and the resulting World Trade Organization, which
will add $150 billion annually to the U.S. economy
once fully phased in and create hundreds of thou-
sands ofjobs.

The President convened the first meeting of leaders
of the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC)
forum and took steps to expand our ties with the
economies of the Asia-Paciﬁc region, the fastest

growing area in the world. At their second forum,
APEC leaders embraced the goal of free trade within
the region by 2020, and at their third meeting in
Osaka in 1995, they formulated a positive action
plan to facilitate and measure progress toward
achieving that goal. This past year, we successfully
negotiated historic trade agreements with our Asian
trading partners, including China, Japan and Korea,
all of which promote substantial new access for
American products and which will foster new atti-
tudes of openness toward our export.

The President hosted the Summit of the Americas in
December 1994, a historic gathering where the 34
democratic nations of the hemisphere committed
themselves to completing negotiations by 2005 on a
regional free-trade agreement. In June 1995, the
United States hosted the Denver Trade Ministerial
and Commerce Forum to promote trade liberaliza-
tion and business facilitation throughout the Western
Hemisphere.

At President Clinton's initiative, the G-7 Leaders put
forth at the Halifax Economic Summit extensive
proposals to prepare our international financial insti-
tutions for the 21st Century, including institutional
reforms to prevent and respond to financial crises, to
promote sustainable development and to support the
Middle East peace process. At the December 1995
U.S.-European Union Summit in Madrid, the
President announced the New Transatlantic Agenda,
including a Transatlantic Marketplace that will
deepen our cooperation on economic issues.

The President developed a Climate Change Action
Plan to help reduce greenhouse emissions at home
and launched the U.S. Initiative on Joint
Implementation to help reduce emissions abroad.
The United States also takes a leading role at the
international level in phasing out ozone-depleting
substances. In June 1993, the United States signed
the Biodiversity Treaty and one year later, the
Desertification Convention.

With strong U.S. leadership, the United Nations
successfully concluded negotiations on a multilateral
agreement designed to reverse the global trend of
declining fish stocks. The agreement complements
the UN Law of the Sea Convention, giving direction

to countries for implementing their obligation under
the Convention to cooperate in conserving and
managing straddling and highly migratory fish stocks.

The Administration has asserted world leadership on
population issues. We played a key role during the
Cairo Conference on Population and Development
in developing a consensus Program of Action,
including increased availability of voluntary family
planning and reproductive health services, sustain-
able economic development, strengthening of family
ties, the empowerment of women including
enhanced educational opportunities and a reduction
in infant and child mortality through immunizations
and other programs.

unmistakable signal of their support for peace. In
1994, U.S. engagement in Northern Ireland
contributed to the establishment of a cease—fire, first
by the IRA and subsequently by loyalist pa.ramili—
taries. U.S. economic and trade initiatives, including
the White House Conference on Trade and
Investment in May 1995, are aimed at promoting
economic revitalization and job creation in Northern
Ireland.

At the Summit of the Americas, the 34 democratic
nations of the hemisphere agreed to a detailed plan
of cooperative action in such diverse fields as health,
education, science and technology, counter-
narcotics, counterterrorism, environmental protec-
tion, information infrastructure and the strengthening

Finally, the President has demonstrated a firm commitment and safeguarding of democratic institutions} in addi-

to expanding the global realm of democracy to advance tion to mutual prosperity and sustainable develop-

the interests of our citizens:

The Administration substantially expanded U.S.
support for democratic and market reform in Russia,
Ukraine and the other new independent states of the
former Soviet Union, including a comprehensive
assistance package for Ukraine.

The United States launched a series of initiatives to
bolster the new democracies of Central and Eastern
Europe, including the White House Trade and
Investment Conference for Central and Eastern
Europe held in Cleveland in January 1995. We
affirmed our concern for their security and market
economic transformation, recognizing that such
assurances would play a key role in promoting
democratic developments.

Working with the international community underthe
auspices of the UN, we succeeded in reversing the
coup in Haiti and restoring the democratically
elected president and government. We are now
helping the Haitian people rebuild their country and
consolidate their hard-won democracy through free
and fair elections at all levels — local, parliamentary
and presidential.

The President's visit to Northern Ireland in November
1995, the first ever by an American President, drew
an unprecedented response from the people of both
the Catholic and Protestant communities and sent an

ment. The Summit ushered in a new era of hemi-
spheric cooperation that would not have been
possible without U.S. leadership and commitment. In
the time since the Summit, progress on strengthening
democratic institutions, thwarting international crimi-
nals and terrorists and preserving natural resources
have helped improve the lives of the hemisphere's
residents.

The United States has increased support for South
Africa as it conducted elections and became a
multiracial democracy. During the state visit of
Nelson Mandela in October 1994, we announced
formation of a bilateral commission to foster new
cooperation between our nations and an assistance
package to support housing, health, education, trade
and investment.

The United States, working with the Organization of
American States, helped reverse an antidemocratic
coup in Guatemala.

In Mozambique and Angola, the United States
played a leading role in galvanizing the international
community to help bring an end to two decades of
civil war and to promote national reconciliation. For
the first time, there is the prospect that all of southern
Africa will enjoy the fruits of peace and prosperity.

At the 1993 UN Conference on Human Rights, the
United States successfully argued for improved inter-

national mechanisms for the promotion of basic
human rights on a global basis. The President signed
the international convention on the rights of the child
and supports Senate consent to ratification for the
convention prohibiting discrimination against
women. The United States also played a major role
in promoting women's — and children's — interna-
tional rights at the 1995 UN Conference on Women
in Beijing.

The national security strategy has reaped significant
accomplishments for the betterment of the American
people. It continues to take advantage of remarkable
opportunities to shape a world conducive to U.S. interests
and consistent with American values — a world of open
societies and open markets. Its tangible results were based
on the belief that if we withdraw U.S. leadership from the
world today, we will have to contend with the conse-
quences of our neglect tomorrow. The progress the
strategy has enabled us to make toward increased security,
prosperity and advancement of democracy was not
inevitable; nor will it proceed easily in an even, uninter-
rupted way — there is a price for our leadership. Because
of this, we know that there must be limits to America's
involvement in the world — limits imposed by careful
evaluation of our fundamental interest and frank assess-

ment of the costs and benefits of possible actions. We
cannot become involved in every problem, but the
choices we make must be always guided by our objectives
of a more secure, prosperous and free America and remain
rooted in the conviction that America cannot walk away
from its global interests or responsibilities, or our citizens’
security and prosperity will surely suffer.

As the distinction between domestic problems and interna-
tional ones is increasingly blurred, we each have a very
direct interest in ensuring the future success of this
strategy: we cannot solve our own problems at home
unless we are also operating in a world that is more
peaceful, more democratic and more prosperous. Ifwe
can help lead the dozens of nations, the billions of
producers and consumers who are trying to adapt to
democracy and free markets, we help to create the condi-
tions for the greatest expansion of prosperity and security
the world has ever witnessed. This is what this strategy
portends by reaffirming America's leadership in the world.

This report has two major sections. The first part of the
report explains our strategy of engagement and enlarge-
ment. The second part describes brieﬂy how the
Administration continues to apply this strategy to the
world's major regions.

II. Advancing our Interests Through
Engagement and Enlargement

A new international era presents the United States with
many distinct dangers, but also with a generally improved
security environment and a range of opportunities to

I mprove it further. The preeminent threat that dominated
our engagement during the Cold War has been replaced
by a complex set of challenges. Our nation's strategy for
defining and addressing those challenges has several core
principles that guide our policies to safeguard American
security, prosperity and fundamental values. First and fore-
most, we must exercise global leadership. We are not the
world's policeman, but as the world's premier economic
and military power, and with the strength of our democ-
ratic values, U.S. engagement is indispensable to the
forging of stable political relations and open trade to
advance our interest.

Our leadership must stress preventive diplomacy —
through such means as support for democracy, economic
assistance, overseas military presence, interaction between
U.S. and foreign militaries and involvement in multilateral
negotiations in the Middle East and elsewhere — in order
to help resolve problems, reduce tensions and defuse
conflict before they become crises. These measures are a
wise investment in our national security because they offer
the prospect of resolving problems with the least human
and material cost.

Our engagement must be selective, focusing on the chal-
lenges that are most important our own interest and
focusing our resources where we can make the most
difference. We must also use the right tools — being
willing to act unilaterally when our direct national interests
are most at stake; in alliance and partnership when our
interests are shared by others; and multilaterally when our

interests are more general and the problems are best
addressed by the international community.

In all cases, the nature of our response must depend on
what best serves our own long-term national interests.
Those interests are ultimately defined by our security
requirements. Such requirements start with our physical
defense and economic well-being. They also include envi-
ronmental security as well as the security of our values
achieved through expansion of the community of democ-
ratic nations.

Our national security strategy draws upon a range of polit-
ical, military and economic instruments, and focuses on
the primary objectives that President Clinton has stressed
throughout his Administration:

- Enhancing Our Security. Taking account of the reali-
ties of the new international era with its array of new
threats, a military capability appropriately sized and
postured to meet the diverse needs of our strategy,
including the ability, in concert with regional allies,
to win two nearly simultaneous major regional
conﬂicts. We will continue to pursue a combination
of diplomatic, economic and defense efforts,
including arms control agreements, to reduce the
danger of nuclear, chemical, biological and conven-
tional conﬂict and to promote stability.

- Promoting Prosperity at Home. A vigorous and inte-
grated economic policy designed to put our own
economic hotise in order, work toward free and
open markets abroad and promote sustainable
development.

11

- Promoting Democracy. A framework of democratic
enlargement that increases our security by protecting,
consolidating and enlarging the community of free
market democracies. Our efforts focus on strength-
ening democratic processes in key emerging democ-
ratic states including Central and Eastern Europe,
Russia, Ukraine and other new independent states of
the former Soviet Union.

In order to advance these objectives, we must remain
engaged in the world through U.S. leadership, with our
national security strategy based on enlarging the world
community of secure, democratic and free market nations.
Overall, this makes the world a safer and more prosperous
place and in so doing directly advances our interests.
Nations that feel secure due to our engagement overseas
are more likely to support free trade and democratic insti-
tutions, thereby enhancing U.S. security and prosperity;
nations with growing and open economies and strong ties
to the United States are more likely to feel secure and to be
unafraid of freedom, thereby not threatening us or others;
and democratic states with similar values are less likely to
threaten one another's interests, and are more likely to
cooperate in confronting mutual security threats and in
promoting free and open trade and economic develop-
ment.

The three basic objectives of our national security strategy
will also guide the allocation of our limited national secu-
rity resources. Because deficit reduction is also central to
the long—term health and competitiveness of the American
economy, we have made it, along with efficient and envi-
ronmentally sound use of our resources, a major priority.
Under the Clinton economic plan, the federal budget
deﬁcit has been lowered as a percentage of the Gross
Domestic Product from 4.9 percent in Fiscal Year 1992 to
2.4 percent in Fiscal Year 1995 — the lowest since 1979.

Enhancing our Security

The U.S. government is responsible for protecting the lives
and personal safety of Americans, maintaining our political
freedom and independence as a nation and promoting the
well—being and prosperity of our nation. No matter how
powerful we are as a nation, we cannot always secure
these basic goals unilaterally. Whether the problem is
nuclear proliferation, regional instability, the reversal of
reform in the former Soviet empire, international crime and

12

terrorism, or unfair trade practices, the threats and chal-
lenges we face frequently demand cooperative, multina-
tional solutions. Therefore, the only responsible U.S.
strategy is one that seeks to ensure U.S. influence over and
participation in collective decisionmaking in a wide and
growing range of circumstances.

An important element of our security preparedness
depends on durable relationships with allies and other
friendly nations. Accordingly, a central thrust of our
strategy of engagement is to sustain and adapt the security
relationships we have with key nations around the world.
These ties constitute an important part of an international
framework that will be essential to ensuring cooperation
across a broad range of issues. Within the realm of security
issues, our cooperation with allies and friendly nations
includes such activities as: conducting combined training
and exercises, coordinating military plans and prepara-
tions, sharing intelligence — particularly in support of
multilateral peacekeeping efforts or initiatives to contain
the inimical behavior of rogue states —joint|y developing
new systems to include cooperative research and develop-
ment programs and controlling exports of sensitive tech-
nologies according to common standards.

The new era presents a different set of threat to our secu-
rity. In this new period, enhancing American security
requires, first and foremost, developing and maintaining a
strong defense capability of forces ready to fight. We are
developing integrated approaches for dealing with threats
arising from the development of nuclear and other
weapons of mass destruction by other nations. Our security
also requires a vigorous arms control effort and a strong
intelligence capability. We have implemented a strategy
for multilateral peace operations. We have clarified
rigorous guidelines for when and how to use military force
in this era.

We also face security risks that a_re not solely military in
nature. An emerging class of transnational environmental
and natural resource issues, and rapid population growth
and refugee ﬂows, a.re increasingly affecting international
stability and consequently will present new challenges to
U.S. strategy. Other increasingly interconnected, transna-
tional phenomena such as terrorism, narcotics trafficking
and organized crime also have security implications both
for present and long—term American policy: the destructive
forces we face inside our borders often have their origins
overseas in rogue nations that breed and harbor terrorists,

in countries where drugs are produced and in international
organized crime cartels, which are principally headquar-
tered outside our borders; and free and open societies, in a
world brought closer together by a technology revolution
where information, money and people can move rapidly
and easily, are inherently more challenged by these kinds
of forces.

We cannot protect ourselves against drug-related crime,
track down terrorists, seize international criminals or stop
the flow of illegal arms or weapons-related materials
without both cooperation among the agencies within our
government and the help of countries that are the origin of
these forces and whose peace and freedoms are also jeop-
ardized. That is why the President proposed new legisla-
tion and initiatives forthe U.S. government last year, while
also unveiling a new international proposal to work more
closely with foreign governments in order to respond more
effectively in fighting these forces that challenge our secu-
rity from within and without.

Finally, the threat of intrusions to our military and commer-
cial information systems poses a significant risk to national
security and is being addressed.

Maintaining a Strong Defense Capability

U.S. military forces are critical to the success of our
strategy. This nation has unparalleled militaw capabilities:
the United States is the only nation able to conduct large-
scale and effective military operations far beyond it
borders. This fact, coupled with our unique position as the
security partner of choice in many regions, provides a
foundation for regional stability through mutually benefi-
cial security partnerships. Our willingness and ability to
play a leading role in defending common interests also
help ensure that the United States will remain an influen-
tial voice in international affairs — political, military and
economic — that affect our well—being, so long as we
retain the military wherewithal to underwrite our commit-
ments credibly.

To protect and advance U.S. interests in the face of the
dangers and opportunities outlined earlier, the United
States must deploy robust and flexible military forces that
can accomplish a variety of tasks:

- Deterring and Defeating Aggression in Major
Regional Conflicts. Our forces must be able to help
offset the militaw power of regional states with inter-
ests opposed to those of the United States and its
allies. To do this, we must be able to credibly deter
and defeat aggression by projecting and sustaining
U.S. power in more than one region if necessaw.

- Providing a Credible Overseas Presence. U.S. forces
must also be forward deployed or stationed in key
overseas regions in peacetime to deter aggression
and advance U.S. strategic interest. Such overseas
presence demonstrates our commitment to allies and
friends, underwrites regional stability, ensures famil-
iarity with overseas operating environments,
promotes combined training among the forces of
friendly countries and provides timely initial
response capabilities.

- Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction. We are
devoting greater efforts to stemming the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and their delivew
means, limiting the spread of weapons-related mate-
rials and technology, and strengthening accounting
and security procedures for global stocks of ﬁssile
materials. At the same time, we must improve our
capabilities to deter, defend against and prevent the
use of such weapons and protect ourselves against
their effect.

- Contributing to Multilateral Peace Operations.
When our interests call for it, the United States must
also be prepared to participate in multilateral efforts
to resolve regional conflicts and bolster new democ-
ratic governments. Thus, ourforces must be ready to
participate in peacekeeping, peace enforcement and
other operations in support of these objectives.

- Supporting Counterterrorism Efforts, Fighting Drug
Trafficking and Other National Security Objectives.
A number of other tasks remain that U.S. forces have
typically carried out with both general purpose and
specialized units. These missions include: counterter-
rorism, noncombatant evacuation, counter—narcotics
operations, special forces assistance to nations and
humanitarian and disaster relief operations.

To meet all of these requirements successfully, our forces
must be capable of responding quickly and operating

13

effectively as a joint team. That is, they must be ready to
fight and win. This imperative demands highly qualified
and motivated people; modern, well-maintained equip-
ment; realistic training; strategic mobility; sufficient support
and sustainment capabilities; timely intelligence; and a
healthy investment in science and technology.

Major Regional Contingencies

The focus of our planning for major theater conflict is on
deterring and, if necessary, fighting and defeating aggres-
sion by potentially hostile regional powers, such as North
Korea, Iran or Iraq. Such states are capable of fielding
sizable militaw forces which can cause serious imbalances
in military power within regions important to the United
States, with allied or friendly states often finding it difficult
to match the power of a potentially aggressive neighbor.
To deter aggression, prevent coercion of allied or friendly
governments and, ultimately, defeat aggression should it
occur, we must prepare our forces to confront this scale of
threat, preferably in concert with our allies and friends, but
unilaterally if necessary. To do this, we must have forces
that can deploy quickly and supplement U.S. forward-
based and forward-deployed forces, along with regional
allies, in halting an invasion and defeating the aggressor,
just as we demonstrated by our rapid response in October
1994 when Iraq threatened aggression against Kuwait.

The forces the Administration fields today are sufficient, in
concert with regional allies, to defeat aggression in two
nearly simultaneous major regional conflict. Programmed
enhancements will sustain and strengthen that capability to
meet future threats. As a nation with global interests, it is

I mportant that the United States maintain forces with
aggregate capabilities on this scale. Obviously, we seekto
avoid a situation in which an aggressor in one region
might be tempted to take advantage when U.S. forces are
heavily committed elsewhere. More basically, maintaining
a 'two war’ force helps ensure that the United States will
have sufficient military capabilities to deter or defeat
aggression by a coalition of hostile powers or by a larger,
more capable adversary than we foresee today. The need
to deter or defeat aggression in two theaters was demon-
strated by the real prospect of near simultaneous hostilities
with Iraq and North Korea in the late summer of 1994. The
threat of such near simultaneous hostilities and our rapid
response in reinforcing our presence and deploying addi-
tional forces showed we have a correct and realistic
defense strategy. And because tomorrow's threats are less

14

clear, a strategy for deterring and defeating aggression in
more than one theater ensures we maintain the flexibility
to meet unknown future threats, while our continued
engagement represented by that strategy helps preclude
such threats from developing in the first place.

We will never know with certainty how an enemy might
fight or precisely what demands might be placed on our
own forces in the future. The contributions of allies or
coalition partners will vary from place to place and over
time. Thus, balanced U.S. forces are needed in order to
provide a wide range of complementary capabilities and to
cope with the unpredictable and unexpected. Our forces
must remain ready and modem to meet future, as well as
present, threats or challenges. Integral to these efforts is the
development of new systems and capabilities, incorpo-
rating state-of-the-art technology and new and more effec-
tive combat organizations.

Overseas Presence

The need to deploy U.S. military forces abroad in peace-
ti me is also an important factor in determining our overall
force structure. We will maintain robust overseas presence
in several forms, such as permanently stationed forces and
pre-positioned equipment, deployments and combined
exercises, port calls and other force visits, as well as mili-
taw-to-military contacts. These activities provide several
benefits. Speciﬁcally they:

- Give form and substance to our bilateral and multi-
lateral security commitment.

° Demonstrate our determination to defend U.S. and
allied interests in critical regions, deterring hostile
nations from acting contrary to those interests.

- Provide forward elements for rapid response in crises
as well as the bases, ports and other infrastructure
essential for deployment of U.S.-based forces by air,
sea and land.

- Enhance the effectiveness of coalition operations,
including peace operations, by improving our ability
to operate with other nations.

- Allow the United States to use it position of trust to
prevent the development of power vacuums and

dangerous arms races, thereby underwriting regional
stability by precluding threats to regional security.

- Facilitate regional integration, since nations that may
not be willing to work together in our absence may
be willing to coalesce around us in a crisis.

- Promote an international security environment of
trust, cooperation, peace and stability, which is
fundamental to the vitality of developing democra-
cies and free—market economies for America's own
economic well—being and security.

Through training programs, combined exercises, military
contacts, interoperability and shared defense with potential
coalition partners, as well as security assistance programs
that include judicious foreign military sales, we can
strengthen the local self-defense capabilities of our friends
and allies. Through active participation in regional security
dialogues, we can reduce regional tensions, increase trans-
parency in armaments and improve our bilateral and
multilateral cooperation.

By improving the defense capabilities of our friends and
demonstrating our commitment to defend common inter-
ests, these activities enhance deterrence, encourage
responsibility-sharing on the part of friends and allies,
decrease the likelihood that U.S. forces will be necessary if
conflict arises and raise the odds that U.S. forces will find a
relatively favorable situation should a U.S. response be
required. U.S. overseas presence visibly supports our
strategy ofengagement, and we must continually assess
the best approaches to achieving its objectives.

Counterterrorism, Fighting Drug Trafﬁcking and
Other Missions

While the missions outlined above will remain the primary
determinants of our general purpose and nuclear force
structure, U.S. militaw forces and assets will also be called
upon to perform a wide range of other important missions
as well. Some of these can be accomplished by conven-
tional forces fielded primarily for theater operations. Often,
however, these missions call for specialized units and
capabilities.

At the same time, the challenges to the security of our citi-
zens, our borders and our democratic institutions from
destructive forces such as terrorists and drug trafﬁckers is

greater today because of access to modern technology.
Cooperation, both within our government and with other
nations, is vital in combating these groups that traffic in
organized violence.

In October 1995, the President announced a new initiative
to work more closely with foreign governments to fight
these forces that threaten our security from without and
within. Along with other provisions, it includes an invita-
tion to join in the negotiation and endorsement of a decla-
ration on citizen security, which would include a no-sanc-
tuary pledge to terrorist and drug traffickers; a counterter-
rorism pact; an antinarcotics offensive; and a pledge to end
the trafficking of illegal arms and of lethal nuclear, biolog-
ical and chemical materials. We will continue to share
intelligence in anticorruption and money-laundering
programs to fight drug trafficking at its source; seek legisla-
tion that would prevent arms traders from fueling regional
conflicts and subverting international embargoes; and
provide increased manpower and funding, strengthened
legislation and additional sanctions on states that sponsor
terrorism to help protect our citizens.

Combating Terrorism

As long as terrorist groups continue to target American citi-
zens and interests, the United States will need to have
specialized unit available to defeat such groups. From

ti me to time, we might also find it necessary to strike terror-
ist at their bases abroad or to attack assets valued by the
governments that support them.

Our policy in countering international terrorists is to make
no concessions to terrorist, continue to pressure state
sponsors of terrorism, fully exploit all available legal mech-
anisms to punish international terrorists and help other
governments improve their capabilities to combat
terrorism.

Countering terrorism effectively requires close, day-to-day
coordination among Executive Branch agencies. Under the
Clinton Administration, the efforts of the Departments of
State, Justice and Defense, the FBI and CIA have been
coordinated, with increased funding and manpower
focused on the problem. Positive results will come from
integration of intelligence, diplomatic and rule-of-law activ-
ities, and through close cooperation with other govern-
ment and international counterterrorist organizations.

15

lmproving U.S. intelligence capabilities is a significant part
of the U.S. response, as the evolving nature of the threat
presents new challenges to the intelligence community.
Terrorists, whether from well-organized groups or the kind
of more loosely organized group responsible for the World
Trade Center bombing, have the advantage of being able
to take the initiative in the timing and choice of targets.
Terrorism involving weapons of mass destruction repre-
sents a particularly dangerous potential threat that must be
countered.

The United States has made concerted efforts to punish
and deter terrorists. On June 26, 1993, following a deter-
mination that Iraq had plotted an assassination attempt
against former President Bush, President Clinton ordered a
cruise missile attack against the headquarters of Iraq's intel-
ligence service in orderto send a firm response and deter
furtherthreat. Similarly, the United States obtained
convictions against defendants in the bombing of the
World Trade Center. In the last three years, more terrorists
have been arrested and extradited to the United States than
during the totality of the previous three Administrations.
We are still determined to apprehend many others,
including the suspected perpetrators of the Pan Am 103
bombing who are being sheltered in Libya, and those
involved in the deadly attack on U.S. Government
employees at CIA Headquarters in 1994.

A growing number of nations have responded to the
Administration’ s message urging international cooperation
in the fight against terrorism. Our success in hunting down
terrorists is in large measure due to a growth of interna-
tional intelligence sharing and increased international law
enforcement efforts. At the Halifax Summit in 1995, the
heads of state from the G-7 and Russia agreed to work
more closely in combating terrorism. This led to the
December 1995 ministerial in Ottawa, which announced a
P-8 pledge to adopt all current counterterrorism treaties by
the year 2000, to cooperate more closely in detecting
forged documents and strengthening border surveillance,
to share information more fully and effectively and to work
together in preventing the use by terrorists of nuclear,
biological and chemical weapons.

Iran's support of terrorism is a primary threat to peace in
the Middle East and a major threat to innocent citizens
everywhere. The President is determined to step up U.S.
efforts bringing international pressure to bear on Iran for its
support of terrorism. President Clinton imposed an

16

embargo against Iran, depriving it of the benefit of trade
and investment with the United States. The embargo's

I mmediate effect was to further disrupt an Iranian
economy already reeling from mismanagement, corruption
and stagnant oil prices. The United States also has sought
the support of our friends and allies to adopt policies to

Ii mit Teheran's threatening behavior. The G-7 has joined
us in condemning Iran's support for terrorism, and we
have secured commitment from Russia and other
members of the post-COCOM "Wassenaar Arrangement"
export control regime not to sell weapons to Iran that have
sensitive, dual-use technologies with military end-uses.

U.S. leadership and close coordination with other govern-
ments and international bodies will continue, as also
demonstrated by the UN Security Council sanctions
against Libya for the Pan Am 103 and UTA 772 bombings,
an international convention dealing with detecting and
controlling plastic explosives, and two important countert-
errorism treaties — the Protocol for the Suppression of
Unlawful Acts of Violence at Airports Serving International
Aviation and the Convention for the Suppression of
Unlawful Attacks Against the Safety of Maritime
Navigation.

Fighting Drug Trafficking

The Administration has undertaken a new approach to the
global scourge of drug abuse and trafficking that will better
integrate domestic and international activities to reduce
both the demand and the supply of drugs. Ultimate
success will depend on concerted efforts and partnerships
by the public, all levels of government and the American
private sector with other governments, private groups and
international bodies.

The U.S. shift in strategy from the past emphasis on transit
interdiction to a more evenly balanced effort with source
countries to build institutions, destroy trafficking organiza-
tions and stop supplies of illicit drugs is showing positive
result. The leaders of the most influential South American
drug mafias, the Medellin and Cali Cartels, have been
apprehended. The President also has invoked the
International Emergency Economic Powers Act to undercut
their financial underpinnings, freezing their assets in the
United States and barring U.S. persons from doing busi-
ness with them. He has announced a major initiative to
combat money laundering throughout the globe, and at his
direction, the government has identified the front compa-

vies and frozen the assets of the Cali Cartel to cut off its
economic lifelines and to stop people from dealing
unknowingly with its companies.

In addition, the United States, in cooperation with key
producing countries, has undertaken initiatives to reinforce
its interdiction activities near the source of production. To
help root out the corruption in which narcotics trafficking
thrives, we are working to support and strengthen democ-
ratic institutions abroad. We are also cooperating with
governments that demonstrate political will to confront the
narcotics threat.

Two comprehensive strategies have been developed, one
to deal with the problem of cocaine and another to address
the growing threat from high-purity heroin entering this
country. We will engage more aggressively with interna-
tional organizations, financial institutions and nongovern-
mental organizations in counternarcotics cooperation.

At home and in the international arena, prevention, treat-
ment and economic alternatives must work hand-in-hand
with law enforcement and interdiction activities. Long-term
efforts will be maintained to help nations develop healthy
economies with fewer market incentives for producing
narcotics. The United States has increased efforts abroad to
foster public awareness and support for governmental
cooperation on a broad range of activities to reduce the
incidence of drug abuse. Public awareness of a demand
problem in producing or trafficking countries can be
converted into public support and increased governmental
law enforcement to reduce trafficking and production.
There has been a significant attitudinal change and aware-
ness in Latin America and the Caribbean, particularly as
producer and transit nations themselves become plagued
with the ill effects of consumption.

Other Missions

The United States government is also responsible for
protecting the lives and safety of Americans abroad. In
orderto carw out this responsibility, selected U.S. militaw
forces are trained and equipped to evacuate Americans
from such situations as the outbreak of civil or international
conflict and natural or man-made disasters. For example,
U.S. Marines evacuated Americans from Monrovia,

Liberia, in August of 1990, and from Mogadishu, Somalia,
in December of that year. In 1991, U.S. forces evacuated
nearly 20,000 Americans from the Philippines over a three-

week period following the eruption of Mount Pinatubo. In
I 994, U.S. Marines, coupled with U.S. airlift, deployed to
Burundi to help ensure the safe evacuation of U.S. citizens
from ethnic fighting in Rwanda.

U.S. forces also provide invaluable training and advice to
friendly governments threatened by subversion, lawless-
ness or insurgency. At any given time, we have small
teams of military experts deployed in roughly 25 countries
helping host governments cope with such challenges.

U.S. military forces and assets are frequently called upon
to provide assistance to victims of floods, storms, drought
and other humanitarian disasters. Both at home and
abroad, U.S. forces provide emergency food, shelter,
medical care and security to those in need.

Finally, the United States will continue as a world leader
in space through its technical expertise and innovation.
Over the past 30 years, as more and more nations have
ventured into space, the United States has steadfastly
recognized space as an international region. Since all
nations are immediately accessible from space, the main-
tenance of an international legal regime for space, similar
to the concept of freedom of the high seas, is especially
important. Numerous attempts have been made in the past
to impose legal limitations on access to space by countries
that are unable, either technologically or economically, to
join space-faring nations. As the commercial importance
of space is developed, the United States can expect further
pressure from nonparticipants to redefine the status of
space, similar to what has been attempted with exclusive
economic zones constraining the high seas.

Retaining the current international character of space will
remain critical to achieving U.S. national security goals.
Our main objectives in this area include:

- Continued freedom of access to and use of space;
- Maintaining the U.S. position as the major
economic, political, military and technological
power in space;
- Deterring threats to U.S. interests in space and

defeating aggressive or hostile acts against U.S. space
assets if deterrence fails;

17

- Preventing the spread of weapons of mass destruc-
tion to space;

- Enhancing global partnerships with other space-
faring nations across the spectrum of economic,
political and security issues.

Deciding When and How to Employ
U.S. Forces

Our strategy calls for the preparation and deployment of
American military forces in the United States and abroad to
support U.S. diplomacy in responding to key dangers —
those posed by weapons of mass destruction, regional
aggression and threats to the stability of states.

Although there may be many demands for U.S. involve-
ment, the need to husband limited resources requires that
we must carefully select the means and level of our partici-
pation in particular military operations. And while it is
unwise to specify in advance all the limitations we will
place on our use of force, we must be as clear as possible
about when and how we will use it.

There are three basic categories of national interests that
can merit the use of our armed forces. The first involves
America's vital interest, that is, interests that are of broad,
overriding importance to the survival, security and vitality
of our national entity — the defense of U.S. territory, citi-
zens, allies and our economic well—being. We will do
whatever it takes to defend these interests, including _
when necessary—the unilateral and decisive use of mili-
taw power. This was demonstrated clearly in the Persian
Gulf through Desert Storm and, more recently, Vigilant
Warrior, when Iraq threatened aggression against Kuwait in
October 1994.

The second category includes cases in which important,
but not vital, U.S. interest are threatened. That is, the
interests at stake do not affect our national survival, but
they do affect importantly our national well—being and the
character of the world in which we live. In such cases,
military forces should only be used if they advance U.S.
interests, they are likely to be able to accomplish their
objectives, the costs and risks of their employment are
commensurate with the interests at stake and other means
have been tried and have failed to achieve our objectives.
Such uses of force should also be selective and limited,

18

reﬂecting the relative saliency of the interests we have at
stake. Haiti and Bosnia are the most recent examples in
this category.

The third category involves primarily humanitarian inter-
ests. Here, our decisions focus on the resources we can
bring to bear by using unique capabilities of our military
rather than on the combat power of military force.
Generally, the military is not the best tool to address
humanitarian concerns. But under certain conditions, the
use of our armed forces may be appropriate: when a
humanitarian catastrophe dwarfs the ability of civilian
relief agencies to respond; when the need for relief is
urgent and only the military has the ability to jump-start
the longer-term response to the disaster; when the
response requires resources unique to the military; and
when the risk to American troops is minimal. The relief
operation in Rwanda is a good case in point. U.S. militaw
forces performed unique and essential roles, stabilized the
situation and then got out, turning the operation over to
the international relief community.

The decision on Whether and when to use force is there-
fore dictated first and foremost by our national interests. In
those speciﬁc areas where our vital or survival interests are
at stake, our use of force will be decisive and, if necessary,
unilateral. In other situations posing a less immediate
threat, our military engagement must be targeted selec-
tively on those areas that most affect our national interests
— for instance, areas where we have a sizable economic
stake or commitments to allies and areas where there is a
potential to generate substantial refugee flows into our
nation or our allies’.

Second, in all cases, the costs and risks of U.S. military
involvement must be judged to be commensurate with the
stakes involved. We will be more inclined to act where
there is reason to believe that our action will bring lasting
improvement. On the other hand, our involvement will be
more circumscribed when other regional or multilateral
actors are better positioned to act than we are. Even in
these cases, however, the United States will be actively
engaged at the diplomatic level. But in every case, we will
consider several critical questions before committing mili-
tary force: Have we considered nonmilitary means that
offer a reasonable chance of success? is there a clearly
defined, achievable mission? What is the environment of
risk we are entering? What is needed to achieve our goals?
What are the potential cost — both human and financial

— of the engagement? Do we have a reasonable likeli-
hood of support from the American people and their
elected representatives? Do we have timelines and mile-
stones that will reveal the extent of success or failure, and
in either case, do we have an exit strategy?

The decision on how we use force has a similar set of
derived guidelines:

First, when we send American troops abroad, we will send
them with a clear mission and, for those operations that
are likely to involve combat, the means to achieve their
objectives decisively, having answered the questions:
What types of U.S. military capabilities should be brought
to bear, and is the use of military force carefully matched
to our political objectives?

Second, as much as possible, we will seekthe help of our
allies and friends or of relevant international institutions. If
our most important national interests are at stake, we are
prepared to act alone. But especially on those matters
touching directly the interest of our allies, there should be
a proportionate commitment from them. Working together
increases the effectiveness of each nation's actions, and
sharing the responsibilities lessens everyone's load.

These, then, are the calculations of interest and cost that
have inﬂuenced our past uses of military power and will

guide us in the future. Every time this Administration has
used force, it has balanced interests against costs. And in
each case, the use of our military has put power behind

our diplomacy, allowing us to make progress we would

not otherwise have achieved.

One final consideration regards the central role the
American people rightfully play in how the United States
wields its power abroad: the United States cannot long
sustain a fight without the support of the public, and close
consultations with Congress are important to this effort.
This is true for humanitarian and other nontraditional inter-
ventions, as well as war. Modern media communications
confront every American with images that both stir the
impulse to intervene and raise the question of an opera-
tion's costs and risks. When it is judged in America's
interest to intervene, we must use force with an unwa-
vering commitment to our objective. While we must
continue to reassess any operation's costs and benefits as it
unfolds and the full range of our options, reflexive calls for
early withdrawal of our forces as soon as casualties arise

endangers our objectives as well as our troops. Doing so
invites any rogue actor to attack our troops to try to force
our departure from areas where our interests lie.

Combating the Spread and Use of
Weapons of Mass Destruction and
Missiles

Weapons of mass destruction — nuclear, biological and
chemical — along with their associated delivery systems,
pose a major threat to our security and that of our allies
and other friendly nations. Thus, a key part of our strategy
is to seek to stem the proliferation of such weapons and to
develop an effective capability to deal with these threats.
We also need to maintain robust strategic nuclear forces
and to implement existing strategic arms agreements.

Nonproliferation and Counterproliferation

A critical priority for the United States is to stem the prolif-
eration of nuclear, biological and chemical weapons and
their missile delivery systems. Countries’ weapons
programs, and their levels of cooperation with our nonpro-
liferation efforts, will be among our most important criteria
in judging the nature of our bilateral relations.

Through programs such as the Nunn-Lugar Cooperative
Threat Reduction effort and other denuclearization initia-
tives, important progress has been made to build a more
secure international environment by combating the threat
posed by the possible theft or diversion of nuclear
warheads or their components. One striking example was
the successful transfer in 1994 of nearly six hundred kilo-
grams of vulnerable nuclear material from Kazakstan to
safe storage in the United States. Kazakstan was concerned
about the security of the material and requested U.S. assis-
tance in removing it to safe storage. The Departments of
Defense and Energy undertook a joint mission to retrieve
the uranium. At the direction of the President, the two
Departments have intensified their cooperative programs
with Russia and other new independent states to enhance
the security of nuclear material. These programs encom-
pass both efforts to improve overall systems for nuclear
material protection, control and accounting and targeted
efforts to address specific proliferation risks. Under an
agreement we secured with Russia, it is converting tons of
highly enriched uranium from dismantled weapons into

19

commercial reactor fuel and has begun delivering that fuel
to the United States. With the United States and Russia,
Ukraine is implementing the Trilateral Statement, which
provides for the transfer of all nuclear warheads from
Ukraine to Russia for dismantlement in return forfair
compensation. Three-quarters of the nuclear weapons
located in Ukraine at the beginning of 1994 have now
been transferred to Russia for dismantlement. All the
nuclear warheads in Kazakstan have been removed, and
most are out of Belarus.

A key objective of our nonproliferation strategy was real-
ized in May 1995 when a consensus of the parties to the
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) extended the
Treaty indefinitely and without conditions. That result
ensured that all Americans today, as well as all succeeding
generations, can count on the continuation of the Treaty
that serves as the bedrock of all global efforts to halt the
spread of nuclear weapons.

Achieving a zero-yield Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty as
soon as possible, achieving a cut-off of fissile material
production for nuclear weapons purposes and strength-
ening the Nuclear Suppliers Group and the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) are important goals. They
complement our comprehensive efforts to discourage the
accumulation of fissile materials, to seek to strengthen
controls and constraints on those materials, and overtime,
to reduce worldwide stocks.

To combat missile proliferation, the United States seeks
prudently to broaden membership of the Missile
Technology Control Regime (MTCR). The Administration
supports the earliest possible ratification and entry into
force of the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) as well
as new measures to deter violations of and enhance
compliance with the Biological Weapons Convention
(BWC). We also support improved export controls for
nonproliferation purposes both domestically and multilat-
erally.

The proliferation problem is global, but we must tailor our
approaches to specific regional contexts. We have
concluded an Agreed Framework to bring North Korea into
full compliance with its nonproliferation obligations,
including the NPT and IAEA safeguards. The agreement
also requires North Korea to freeze and eventually
dismantle its indigenous nuclear program under IAEA
monitoring. We will continue efforts to prevent Iran from

20

advancing its weapons of mass destruction objectives and
to thwart Iraq from reconstituting its previous programs.
The United States seeks to cap, reduce and, ultimately,
eliminate the nuclear and missile capabilities of India and
Pakistan. In the Middle East and elsewhere, we encourage
regional arms control agreements that address the legiti-
mate security concerns of all parties. These tasks are being
pursued with other states that share our concern for the
enormous challenge of stemming the proliferation of such
weapons.

The United States has signed bilateral agreements with
Russia, Ukraine and South Africa, which commit these
countries to adhere to the guidelines of the MTCR. We
also secured China's commitment to observe the MTCR
guidelines and it agreement not to transfer MTCR-
controlled, ground-to-ground missiles. Russia has agreed
not to transfer space-launch vehicle technology with
potential military applications to India. South Africa has
agreed to dismantle its Categow I (500 kilogram payload,
300 kilometer range) missile systems and hasjoined the
NPT and accepted full-scope safeguards. Hungary, the
Czech Republic, the Slovakia Republic, Poland and
Romania have joined the Australia Group (which controls
the transfer of items that could be used to make chemical
or biological weapons). Hungary, Argentina, Russia, Brazil
and South Africa have joined the MTCR. Argentina, Brazil
and Chile have brought the Treaty of Tlatelolco into force.
There has been major progress on the dismantlement and
removal of intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs)
located in Ukraine, Belarus and Kazakstan. Our
Cooperative Threat Reduction (CTR) program has made a
significant contribution to this effort.

Thus, the United States seeks to prevent additional coun-
tries from acquiring chemical, biological and nuclear
weapons and the means to deliver them, and will use the
full range of its intelligence capabilities to detect such
activities. However, should such efforts fail, U.S. forces
must be prepared to deter, prevent and defend against
their use. As agreed at the January 1994 NATO Summit,
we are working with our Allies to develop a policy frame-
work to consider how to reinforce ongoing prevention
efforts and to reduce the proliferation threat and protect
against it.

The United States will retain the capacity to retaliate
against those who might contemplate the use of weapons
of mass destruction so that the costs of such use will be

seen as outweighing the gains. However, to minimize the
impact of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction on
our interests, we will need the capability not only to deter
their use against either ourselves or our allies and friends
but also, where necessary and feasible, to prevent it.

This will require improved defensive and offensive capabil-
ities. To minimize the vulnerability of our forces abroad to
weapons of mass destruction, we are placing a high
priority on improving our ability to locate, identify and
disable arsenals of weapons of mass destruction, produc-
tion and storage facilities for such weapons and their
delivew systems. We also have vigorous and highly effec-
tive theater missile defense development programs
designed to protect against conventional weapons and
weapons of mass destruction. Although the intelligence
community does not believe that an intercontinental-range
missile threat to our homeland is likely to emerge from
rogue states in the foreseeable future, we are developing a
national missile defense deployable readiness program so
we can respond quickly (within 2-3 years) should a
sooner-than-expected threat materialize.

Nuclear Forces

In September 1994, the President approved the recommen-
dations of the Pentagon's Nuclear Posture Review (NPR). A
key conclusion of this review is that the United States will
retain a triad of strategic nuclear forces sufficient to deter
any future hostile foreign leadership with access to
strategic nuclear forces from acting against our vital inter-
est and to convince it that seeking a nuclear advantage
would be futile. Therefore, we will continue to maintain
nuclear forces of sufficient size and capability to hold at
risk a broad range of assets valued by such political and
military leaders. The President approved the NPR's recom-
mended strategic nuclearforce posture as the U.S. START
II force. The forces are: 500 Minuteman ICBMs, 14 Trident
submarines all with D-5 missiles, 20 B-2 and 66 B-52
strategic bombers, and a non-nuclear role for the B-ls. This
force posture allows us the flexibility to reconstitute or
reduce further, as conditions warrant. The NPR also reaf-
firmed the current posture and deployment of nonstrategic
nuclear forces, and the United States has eliminated carrier
and surface ship nuclear weapons capability.

Arms Control

Arms control is an integral part of our national security
strategy. Arms control can help reduce incentives to initiate
attack; enhance predictability regarding the size and struc-
ture of forces, thus reducing fear of aggressive intent;
reduce the size of national defense industry establishments
and thus permit the growth of more vital, nonmilitary
industries; ensure confidence in compliance through effec-
tive monitoring and verification; and, ultimately, contribute
to a more stable and calculable balance of power.

In the area of strategic arms control, prescribed reductions
in strategic offensive arms and the steady shift toward less
destabilizing systems remain indispensable. Ukraine's
December 1994 accession to the Nuclear Non-pro|ifera-
tion Treaty —joining Belarus and Kazakstan's decision to
be non-nuclear weapon states — was followed immedi-
ately by the exchange of instruments of ratiﬁcation and
brought the START I treaty into force at the December

I 994 CSCE summit, paving the way forthe Senate's advice
and consent for ratification of the 1993 START II Treaty on
January 26, 1996. Under START II, the United States and
Russia will each be left with between 3,000 and 3,500
deployed strategic nuclear warheads, which is a two-thirds
reduction from the Cold War peak. Presidents Clinton and
Yeltsin have agreed that once START II is ratified by both
countries, both nations will immediately begin to deacti-
vate or otherwise remove from combat status, those
systems whose elimination will be required by that treaty,
rather than waiting for the treaty to run its course through
the year 2003. START II ratification will also open the door
to the next round of strategic arms control, in which we
will consider what further reductions in, or limitations on,
remaining U.S. and Russian nuclearforces should be
carried out. We will also explore strategic confidence-
building measures and mutual understandings that reduce
the risk of accidental war.

The full and faithful implementation of other existing arms
control agreements, including the Anti-Ballistic Missile
(ABM) Treaty, Strategic Arms Reduction Talks I (START I),
Biological Weapons Convention (BWC), Intermediate-
range Nuclear Forces (INF) Treaty, Conventional Forces in
Europe (CFE) Treaty, several nuclear testing agreements, the
1994 Vienna Document on Confidence and Security-
Building Measures (CSBMs), Open Skies, the
Environmental Modification Convention (EnMod), Incidents
at Sea and many others will remain an important element

21

of national security policy. The ongoing negotiation initi-
ated by the United States to clarify the ABM Treaty by
establishing an agreed demarcation between strategic and
theater ballistic missiles, and updating the Treaty to reflect
the break-up of the Soviet Union as well as the
Administration's efforts to resolve the CFE flank issue on the
basis of a map realignment, reflects the Administration's
commitment to maintaining the integrity and effectiveness
of crucial arms control agreements.

Future arms control efforts may become more regional and
multilateral. Regional arrangements can add predictability
and openness to security relations, advance the rule of
international law and promote cooperation among partici-
pants. They help maintain deterrence and a stable military
balance at regional levels. The United States is prepared to
promote, help negotiate, monitor and participate in
regional arms control undertakings compatible with
American national security interests. We will generally
support such undertakings but will not seekto impose
regional arms control accords against the wishes of affected
states. In this regard, the United States, United Kingdom
and France announced they would sign the protocols to the
South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone in the first half of I 996.

As arms control, whether regional or global, becomes
increasingly multilateral, the Conference on Disarmament
(CD) in Geneva will play an even more important role. The
United States will support measures to increase the effec-
tiveness and relevance of the CD. Arms control agreements
can head off potential arms races in certain weapons cate-
gories or in some environments. We will continue to seek
greater transparency, responsibility and, where appropriate,
restraint in the transfer of conventional weapons and global
military spending. The UN register of conventional arms
transfers is a start in promoting greatertransparency of
weapons transfers and buildups, but more needs to be
done.

In February 1995, the President approved a comprehensive
policy on transfers of conventional arms that balances legit-
imate arms sales to support the national security of U.S.
allies and friends and the need for multilateral restraint in
transferring arms that would undermine stability. The
United States has also led international efforts to create the
multilateral "Wassenaar Arrangement on Export Controls
for Conventional Arms and Dual-use Goods and
Technology" — the successor to the Coordinating
Committee for East—West Trade (COCOM) — to provide a

22

regime for transparency and restraint on dangerous trans-
fers of conventional arms and dual-use technologies.
Measures to reduce over-sized defense industrial establish-
ments, especially those parts involved with weapons of
mass destruction, will also contribute to stability in the
post—Cold War world. The Administration has pursued
defense conversion agreements with the former Soviet
Union states, and defense conversion is also on the
agenda with China. The United States has also proposed a
regime to reduce the number and availability of the
world's long-lived antipersonnel mines whose indiscrimi-
nate and irresponsible use has reached crisis proportions.
In addition, the Administration is leading the international
effort to strengthen the laws governing landmine use in the
1980 Convention on Conventional Weapons. The
Administration obtained Senate consent to ratification of
this Convention in March 1995.

Peace Operations

In addition to preparing for major regional contingencies
and overseas presence, we must prepare ourforces for
peace operations to support democracy or conflict resolu-
tion. The United States, along with others in the interna-
tional community, will seekto prevent and contain local-
ized conflicts before they require a military response. U.S.
support capabilities such as airlift, intelligence and global
communications have often contributed to the success of
multilateral peace operations, and they will continue to do
so. U.S. combat units are less likely to be used for most
peace operations, but in some cases their use will be
necessary or desirable and justiﬁed by U.S. national inter-
ests as guided by the Presidential Decision Directive, 'U.S.
Policy on Reforming Multilateral Peace Operations,’ and
outlined below.

Multilateral peace operations are an important component
of our strategy. From traditional peacekeeping to peace
enforcement, multilateral peace operations are sometimes
the best way to prevent, contain or resolve conflicts that
could otherwise be far more costly and deadly.

Peace operations often have served, and continue to serve,
important U.S. national interest. In some cases, they have
helped preserve peace between nations, as in Cyprus and
the Golan Heights. In others, peacekeepers have provided
breathing room for fledgling democracies, as in Cambodia,
El Salvador and Namibia. And in Latin America, the
United States, along with fellow Guarantors of the 1942

Rio Protocol Argentina, Brazil and Chile, has contributed
to a border monitoring effort to stop fighting between Peru
and Ecuador and help achieve a lasting resolution of their
border dispute.

At the same time, however, we must recognize that some
types of peace operations make demands on the UN that
exceed the organization's capabilities. The United States is
working with the UN headquarters and other member
states to ensure that the UN embarks only on peace opera-
tions that make political and military sense and that the
UN is able to manage effectively those peace operations it
does undertake. We support the creation of a professional
UN peace operations headquarters with a planning staff,
access to timely intelligence, a logistics unit that can be
rapidly deployed and a modern operations center with
global communications. The United States has reduced
our peacekeeping payments to 25 percent while working
to ensure that other nations pay their fair share. We are
also working to ensure that peacekeeping operations by
appropriate regional organizations such as NATO and the
OSCE can be carried out effectively.

In order to maximize the benefits of UN peace operations,
the United States must make highly disciplined choices
about when and under what circumstances to support or
participate in them. The need to exercise such discipline is
at the heart of President Clinton's policy on Reforming
Multilateral Peace Operations. The President's policy
review on peace operations — the most thorough ever
undertaken by an Administration — requires the United
States to undertake a rigorous analysis of requirements and
capabilities before voting to support or participate in
peace operations. The United States has not hesitated to
use its position on the Security Council to ensure that the
UN authorizes only those peace operations that meet
these standards.

Most UN peacekeeping operations do not involve U.S.
forces. On those occasions when we consider contributing
U.S. forces to a UN peace operation, we will employ
rigorous criteria, including the same principles that would
guide any decision to employ U.S. forces. In addition, we
will ensure that the risks to U.S. personnel and the
command and control arrangements governing the partici-
pation ofAmerican and foreign forces are acceptable to
the United States.

The question of command and control is particularly crit-
ical. There may be times when it is in our interest to place

U.S. troops under the temporary operational control of a
competent UN or allied commander. The United States
has done so many times in the past — from the siege of
Yorktown in the Revolutionary War to the battles of Desert
Storm. However, under no circumstances will the
President ever relinquish his command authority over U.S.
forces.

Improving the ways the United States and the UN decide
upon and conduct peace operations will not make the
decision to engage any easier. The lesson we must take
away from our first ventures in peace operations is not that
we should forswear such operations but that we should
employ this tool selectively and more effectively. In short,
the United States views peace operations as a means to
support our national security strategy, not as a strategy

unto itself.

The President is firmly committed to securing the active
support of the Congress for U.S. participation in peace
operations. The Administration has set forth a detailed
blueprint to guide consultations with Congress. With
respect to particular operations, the Administration will
undertake consultations on questions such as the nature of
expected U.S. military participation, the mission parame-
ters of the operation, the expected duration and budgetaw
implications. In addition to such operation-specific consul-
tations, the Administration has also conducted regular
monthly briefings for congressional staff and will deliver an
Annual Comprehensive Report to Congress on Peace
Operations. Congress is critical to the institutional devel-
opment ofa successful U.S. policy on peace operations,
including the resolution of funding issues that have an
impact on military readiness.

Two other point deserve emphasis. First, the primary
mission of our Armed Forces is not peace operations; it is
to deter and, if necessaw, to fight and win conflicts in
which our most important interests are threatened. Second,
while the international community can create conditions
for peace, the responsibility for peace ultimately rests with
the people of the country in question.

Strong Intelligence Capabilities

U.S. intelligence capabilities are critical instruments of our
national power and integral to implementing our national
security strategy. Strong intelligence capabilities are
needed to protect our nation by providing warning of

23

threats to U.S. national security, by providing support to
the policy and military communities to prevail over these
threats and by identifying opportunities for advancing our
national interests through support to diplomacy.
Decisionmakers, military commanders and policy analysts
at all levels rely on the intelligence community to collect
information unavailable from other sources and to provide
strategic and tactical analysis to help surmount challenges
to our national interest and security.

Because of the change in the security environment since
the end of the Cold War, intelligence must address a
wider range of threats and policy needs. In this demanding
environment, the intelligence community must maintain
its global reach, refine and further focus its collection
efforts and work even more closely with the policy depart-
ments. Moreover, its analytic effort must provide a
coherent framework to help senior U.S. officials manage a
complex range of military, political and economic issues.
Intelligence emphasis must be placed on preserving and
enhancing those collection and analytic capabilities that
provide unique information against those states and
groups that pose the most serious threats to U.S. security.

To build greater focus, direction and responsiveness into
these intelligence activities, the President last year signed a
Presidential Decision Directive (PDD) on intelligence
priorities. This Directive established for the first time a
series of categories of intelligence needs. This PDD is a
flexible document designed to accommodate shifting
priorities within the categories. Current Presidential priori-
ties include:

- Warning and management of threats that pose a
direct or immediate threat to U.S. interests.

- "Rogue states" whose policies a_re consistently
hostile to the United States.

- Countries that possess strategic nuclear forces that
can pose a threat to the United States and its allies.

' Command and control of nuclear weapons and
control of nuclear fissile materials.

- Transnational threats such as proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, international narcotics
trafficking, international terrorism and international
organized crime.

24

- Ongoing or potential major regional conflicts where
the United States has national security interests.

- lntensified counterintelligence against hostile foreign
intelligence services.

U.S. intelligence must not only monitor traditional threats
but also assist the policy community to forestall new and
emerging threats, especially those of a transnational nature.
In carrying out these responsibilities, the intelligence
community must:

- Support U.S. military operations worldwide.
Whenever U.S. forces are deployed, the highest
priority is to ensure that our militaw commanders
receive the timely information required to execute
successfully their mission while minimizing the loss
of American lives.

- Support diplomatic efforts in pursuit of U.S. foreign
policy objectives by providing policymakers and
diplomats timely intelligence on political develop-
ments in key areas such as the Middle East, the
Balkans and North Korea.

- Provide worldwide capabilities to detect, identify and
deter efforts of foreign nations to develop weapons of
mass destruction and ancillary delivery systems.

- Gather information on terrorist activities aimed at
U.S. persons or interest and help thwart such activi-
ties whether conducted by well-organized groups or
loose associations of disaffected individuals intent on
striking at the United States.

- Provide worldwide capabilities to gather timely intel-
ligence on current and emerging information tech-
nologies or infrastructure that may potentially
threaten U.S. interests at home or abroad.

- Contribute where appropriate to policy efforts aimed
at bolstering our economic prosperity.

- Provide the timely information necessary to monitor
treaties, promote democracy and free markets, forge
alliances and track emerging threats.

The collection and analysis of economic intelligence will
play an increasingly important role in helping policy-

makers understand economic trends. Economic intelli-
gence can help by identifying threats to private U.S.
economic enterprises from foreign intelligence services as
well as unfair trading practices. Intelligence must also iden-
tify emerging threats that could affect the international
economy and the stability of some nation states, such as
the upsurge in international organized crime and illegal
trafficking in narcotics.

The development and implementation of U.S. policies to
promote democracy abroad relies on sound intelligence
support. In order to forecast adequately dangers to democ-
racy abroad, the intelligence community and policy
departments must track political, economic, social and
military developments in those parts of the world where
U.S. interests are most heavily engaged and where collec-
tion of information from open sources is inadequate. This
often leads to early warning of potential crises and facili-
tates preventive diplomacy.

mproving the management of intelligence resources and
focusing on the principal concerns of policymakers and
military commanders enhances the value of intelligence
and contributes to our national well—being. The establish-
ment, for example, of the National Imagery and Mapping
Agency will provide a more integrated imagery capability
that will be especially important in providing warning of
threats to U.S. and allied interests and in supporting crisis
management and military operations. Intelligence
producers must develop closer relationships with the users
of intelligence to make products more responsive to
current consumer needs. This includes identifying
emerging threats to modern information systems and
supporting the development of protection strategies. The
continuous availability of intelligence, especially during
crises, is of crucial importance. Also underlying all intelli-
gence activities must be an increased awareness of, and
enhanced capabilities in, counterintelligence. Finally, to
enhance the study and support of worldwide environ-
mental, humanitarian and disaster relief activities, technical
intelligence assets — especially imagery — must be
directed to a greater degree toward collection of data on
these subject.

Fighting International Organized Crime

International organized crime jeopardizes the global trend
toward peace and freedom, undermines fragile new
democracies, saps the strength from developing countries

and threatens our efforts to build a safer, more prosperous
world. The rise of organized crime in the new independent
states of the former Soviet Union and Central Europe
weakens new democracies and poses a direct threat to
U.S. interests, particularly in light of the potential for the
theft and smuggling by organized criminals of nuclear
materials left within some of these nations.

The Administration has launched a major initiative to
combat international organized crime. Criminal enterprises
are presently moving vast sums of illegal gains through the
international financial system with impunity. In addition to
invoking the International Emergency Economic Powers
Act to undercut the financial underpinnings of criminal
enterprises, the President has ordered an action plan to
combat money laundering throughout the globe by
directing the government to identify and put on notice
nations that tolerate money laundering. We intend to work
with these nations to bring their banks and financial
systems into conformity with the international standards
against moneylaundering — or we will consider sanctions.
The Justice Department is also drafting legislation, which
will be submitted to Congress, to provide U.S. agencies
with the tools they need to respond to organized criminal
activity.

Because the threat of organized crime comes from abroad
as well as at home, we will work with other nations to
keep our citizens safe. The President's invitation at the
United Nations to all countries to join the United States in
fighting international organized crime by measures of their
own and by negotiating and endorsing an international
declaration on citizens’ safety — a declaration which
would include a "no-sanctuary for organized criminals"
pledge — is an effort to enhance our international cooper-
ative effort to protect our people.

International crime organizations target nations whose law
enforcement agencies lack the experience and capacity to
stop them. To help police in the new democracies of
Central Europe, Hungary and the United States established
an international law enforcement academy in Budapest.
The President also proposed last year at the United Nations
an effective police partnership that would establish a
network of such centers around the world to share the
latest crime-fighting techniques and technology.

The President's initiative also targeted the criminal or
quasi-legal enterprises that have begun to develop an enor-

25

mous gray-market trade in illegal weapons. By forging
documents or diverting deliveries of armaments, these
networks have been able to move weapons to areas of
conflict or instability. The graymarket continues to fuel
insurgencies and subvert international arms embargoes.
These networks serve criminals and terrorists alike, and
parasitically feed off and ultimately threaten, the open
markets and open societies that we have worked so hard to
advance.

National Security Emergency
Preparedness

We will do all we can to prevent destructive forces such as
terrorism, the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
threats to our information systems and catastrophes from
within such as natural disasters, from endangering our citi-
zens. But we must also be prepared to respond effectively
if an emergency does occur in order to ensure the surviv-
ability of our institutions and national infrastructure, protect
lives and property and preserve our way of life. National
security emergency preparedness is imperative, and we
must continue to work aggressively to ensure appropriate
threat mitigation and response capabilities, including the
ability to restore to normalcy elements of our society
affected by national security emergencies or disasters
resulting in widespread disruption, destruction, injury or
death. To this end, comprehensive, all-hazard emergency
preparedness planning by all Federal departments and
agencies continues to be a crucial national security
requirement.

The Environment and Sustainable
Development

The more clearly we understand the complex interrelation-
ships between the different parts of our world's environ-
ment, the better we can understand the regional and even
global consequences of local changes to the environment.
increasing competition for the dwindling reserves of
uncontaminated air, arable land, fisheries and other food
sources and water, once considered 'free' goods, is already
a very real risk to regional stability around the world. The
range of environmental risks serious enough to jeopardize
international stability extends to massive population flight
from man-made or natural catastrophes, such as Chernobyl
orthe East African drought, and to large-scale ecosystem
damage caused by industrial pollution, deforestation, loss

26

of biodiversity, ozone depletion, desertification, ocean
pollution and, ultimately, climate change. Strategies
dealing with environmental issues of this magnitude will
require partnerships between governments and nongovern-
mental organizations, cooperation between nations and
regions, sustained scientific research and a commitment to
a strategically focused, long—term policy for emerging envi-
ronmental risks.

The decisions we make today regarding military force
structures typically influence our ability to respond to
threats 20 to 30 years in the future. Similarly, our current
decisions regarding the environment and natural resources
will affect the magnitude of their security risks over at least
a comparable period of time, if not longer. The measure of
our difficulties in the future will be settled by the steps we
take in the present.

As a priority initiative, the U.S. successfully led efforts at
the Cairo Conference to develop a consensus Program of
Action to address the continuous climb in global popula-
tion, including increased availability of family planning
and reproductive health services, sustainable economic
development, the empowerment of women to include
enhanced educational opportunities and a reduction in
infant and child mortality. Rapid population growth in the
developing world and unsustainable consumption patterns
in industrialized nations are the root of both present and
potentially even greater forms of environmental degrada-
tion and resource depletion. A conservative estimate of the
g|obe's population projects 8.5 billion people on the
planet by the year 2025. Even when making the most
generous allowances for advances in science and tech-
nology, one cannot help but conclude that population
growth and environmental pressures will feed into
immense social unrest and make the world substantially
more vulnerable to serious international frictions.

Promoting Prosperity at Home

A central goal of our national security strategy is to
promote America's prosperity through efforts both at home
and abroad. Our economic and security interests are
increasingly inseparable. Our prosperity at home depends
on engaging actively abroad. The strength of our diplo-
macy, our ability to maintain an unrivaled military, the
attractiveness of our values abroad — all these depend in
part on the strength of our economy.

Enhancing American Competitiveness

Our primaw economic goal is to strengthen the American
economy. The first step toward that goal was reducing the
federal deficit and the burden it imposes on the economy
and future generations. The economic program passed in
1993 has restored investor confidence in the United States
and strengthened our position in international economic
negotiations. Under the Clinton economic plan, the
federal budget deficit as a percentage of the Gross
Domestic Product was lowered from 4.9 percent in Fiscal
Year 1 992 to 2.4 percent in Fiscal Year 1995 — the lowest
since 1979. And Fiscal Year 1995 was the first time that
the deficit has been reduced three years in a row since the
Truman Administration. We are building on this deficit
reduction effort with other steps to improve American
competitiveness: investing in science and technology;
assisting integration of the commercial and military indus-
trial sectors; improving information networks and other
vital infrastructure; and improving education and training
programs for America's workforce. We are structuring our
defense R&D effort to place greater emphasis on dual-use
technologies that allow the military to capitalize on
commercial-sector innovation for lower cost, higher
quality and increased performance. We are also reforming
the defense acquisition system so that we can develop and
procure weapons and materiel more efficiently.

Strengthening Macroeconomic
Coordination

As national economies become more integrated interna-
tionally, the United States cannot thrive in isolation from
developments abroad. International economic expansion
is benefiting from G-7 macroeconomic policy coordina-
tion. Our work to strengthen an effective, cooperative G-7
dialogue has led to better economic growth in the G-7
countries. In the United States, economic trends point to
continued economic strength and sustained expansion.
Conditions for growth among our G-7 partners appear to
be in place for most countries, and inflation is well under
control.

Enhancing Access to Foreign Markets

The success of American business and our ability to create
quality jobs for our workers is more than ever dependent

upon success in exporting to international markets. The
ability to compete internationally also assures that our
companies will continue to innovate and increase produc-
tivity, which in turn will lead to improvements in our own
living standards. But to compete abroad, ourfirms need
access to foreign markets, just as foreign industries have
access to our open market. We vigorously pursue
measures to increase access for our goods and services —
through bilateral, regional and multilateral arrangements.

Export Strategy and Advocacy Program

In 1993, the Administration published a report creating
America's first national export strategy and making 65
specific recommendations for reforming the way govern-
ment works with the private sector to expand export.
Among the recommendations were significant improve-
ments in advocacy, export financing, market information
systems and product standards education. Our objective is
to expand U.S. exports to over $1.2 trillion by the year
2000, which would mean some 5 million new American
jobs and a total of some 16 million jobs supported by
exports by the turn of the century.

Our export strategy is working. Since this Administration
took office, the United States has regained its position from
Germany as the world's largest exporter. We have
designed and begun implementing new approaches to
promoting exports, notably our strategy of focusing upon
the ten "Big Emerging Markets" that will take more than a
quarter of the world's imports by the year 2010. Our
strong export performance has supported as many as 2
million new, export-related jobs since January 1993. But
we know that we need to export more in the years ahead
if we are to reduce further our trade deficit and raise living
standards with high-wage jobs.

Export Controls

Another critical element in boosting U.S. exports is
reforming the outdated export licensing system. In
September 1993, we liberalized controls on more than
$30 billion of computer exports, and in March 1994, we
eliminated controls on virtually all civilian telecommuni-
cations equipment to the former Soviet Union, Central and
Eastern Europe and China. The Administration is also
seeking comprehensive reform of the Export
Administration Act, which governs the process of export

27

licensing. The goal of this reform is to strengthen our ability
to combat the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
and protect other national interests, while removing unnec-
essarily burdensome licensing requirements left over from
the Cold War. In 1995, we eliminated controls on the
export of computers to our closest allies and liberalized
controls on other computer exports consistent with our
national security interests.

Expanding the Realm of Open Markets

The conclusion of NAFTA, the Uruguay Round of GATT,
the Bogor Declaration of the 1994 APEC leaders meeting
and 1995 Osaka Action Plan, the Summit of the Americas’
Action Plan and the U.S.-EU Transatlantic Marketplace
represent unprecedented progress toward more open
markets both at the regional and global levels. The
Administration intends to continue its efforts in further
enhancing U.S. access to foreign market. The World
Trade Organization (\/\/TO) will provide a new institutional
leverfor securing such access. Emerging market, particu-
larly along the Pacific Rim, present vast opportunities for
American enterprise, and APEC now provides a suitable
vehicle for the exploration of such opportunities. Similarly,
the United States convened the Summit of the Americas to
seize the opportunities created by the movement toward
open markets throughout the hemisphere. The
Transatlantic Marketplace launched with the European
Union in Madrid in December 1995, will further expand
our economic ties. All such steps in the direction of
expanded trading relationships will be undertaken in a way
consistent with protection of the international environment
and towards the goal of sustainable development here and
abroad.

The North American Free Trade Agreement

On December 3, 1993, President Clinton signed the North
American Free Trade Act (NAFTA), which creates a free
trade zone among the United States, Canada and Mexico.
NAFTA has already created nearly 310,000 American jobs
because of export to our NAFTA partners. NAFTA has also
increased Mexico's capacity to cooperate with our nation
on a wide range of issues that cross our 2,000 mile border
— including the environment, narcotics trafficking and
illegal immigration. This Free Trade Act helped insulate our
trade relationship with Mexico and protect and increase
U.S. exports to that country — and the jobs they support

28

— during the 1995 Mexican financial crisis and the subse-
quent economic recession and adjustment period. We
have also begun negotiations with Chile on expanding
NAFTA's membership.

Asia Paciﬁc Economic Cooperation

Our economic relations depend vitally on our ties with the
Asia Pacific region, which is the world's fastest-growing
economic area. In November 1993, President Clinton
convened the first-ever summit of the leaders of the
economies that constitute the Asia Pacific Economic
Cooperation (APEC) forum. U.S. initiatives in the APEC
forum will open new opportunities for economic coopera-
tion and permit U.S. companies to expand their involve-
ment in substantial infrastructure planning and construc-
tion throughout the region. The trade and investment
framework agreed to in 1993 provided the basis for
enhancing the 'open regionalism’ that defines APEC. At the
second leaders meeting in November 1994, APEC leaders
embraced the goal of free and open trade and investment
throughout the region by 2020. Athird meeting in Osaka,
Japan, in 1995 adopted an action agenda for facilitating
and measuring progress toward that goal.

Uruguay Round of GATT

The successful conclusion in December 1993 of the
Uruguay Round of the negotiations under the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), after seven years
and three "final" deadlines, significantly strengthened the
world trading system. The Uruguay Round accord is the
largest, most comprehensive trade agreement in history. It
will reduce tariffs by 40 percent and extend trade rules to
agriculture, services and international property rights. The
U.S. economy is expected to gain $150 billion per year in
GNP once the Uruguay Round is fully phased in, which
will create hundreds of thousands of new U.S. jobs and
expand opportunities for U.S. businesses. Working with
Congress, the President secured U.S. approval of this path-
breaking agreement and the resulting World Trade
Organization, which provides a forum to resolve disputes
openly. The President remains committed to ensuring that
the commitments in the Uruguay Round agreement are
fulfilled.

U.S. - Japan Framework Agreement

The Administration continues to make progress with Asia's
largest economy and America's second largest trading
partner in increasing market access and strengthening
sustainable economic growth internationally. Since the
U.S.-Japan Framework for Economic Partnership was
established by President Clinton and Prime Minister
Miyazawa in 1993, we have reached 20 market access
agreements with Japan covering a range of key sectors,
such as medical technologies, telecommunications, insur-
ance, flat glass, financial services and intellectual property
right. Our merchandise exports to Japan in the sectors
covered by these agreements have expanded at a rate that
is more than double that of export growth to Japan in the
noncovered sectors. In August 1995, we concluded a land-
mark agreement in automobile and auto parts trade, the
largest sector of our bilateral trade deﬁcit, and last summer
we took steps to support market access for U.S. transport
services.

The Administration is committed to ensuring that competi-
tive American goods and services have fair access to the
Japanese market. In addition, the Administration is working
with Japan to address common challenges to sustainable
economic development through the Framework's Common
Agenda for Cooperation in Global Perspective.
Partnerships have been strengthened in the environment,
human health and advanced technology development, and
new initiatives were launched this year that address educa-
tion, food security, counter-terrorism, natural disaster miti-
gation, combating emerging infectious diseases and nation-
building. This Administration will continue to seek partner-
ships that help both nations fulfill our international respon-
sibilities as the world's two largest economies.

Summit of the Americas

America's economy benefits enormously from the opportu-
nity offered by the commitment of the 34 democratic
nations of the Western Hemisphere to negotiate by 2005 a
Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA) . The Western
Hemisphere is our largest export market, constituting over
35 percent of all U.S. sales abroad. The action plan will
accelerate progress toward free, integrated market that
will create new, high-wage jobs and sustain economic
growth for America. The June 1995 Trade Ministerial
created seven working groups to begin preparations for the
negotiation of the FTAA.

U.S.-EU Transatlantic Marketplace

On December 3, 1995, President Clinton launched the
New Transatlantic Agenda at the U.S.-EU Summit in
Madrid, Spain. As part of this agenda, the United States
and the European Union (EU) agreed to take concrete
steps to reduce barriers to trade and investment through
the creation of a New Transatlantic Marketplace. The
United States and the EU also will explore the possibility
of agreeing on further tariff reductions and accelerated
reductions in tariffs already agreed to in the Uruguay
Round; negotiate agreements on mutual recognition of
certiﬁcation and testing procedures; conclude a customs
cooperation and mutual assistance agreement; carry out a
joint study of tariff and nontariff barriers to trade and
options for their elimination; and work together in the
Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development
(OECD) and the V\f|'O to achieve agreements on foreign
investment and telecommunications services.

OECD Multilateral Investment Agreement

In May 1995, the United States helped launch OECD
negotiations of a Multilateral Agreement on Investment,
which will be a state-of-the-art investment agreement. The
negotiations are intended to conclude by 1996. There is
already broad consensus that the agreement will be based
on high standards, including national and most-favored-
nation treatment, and that exceptions would be limited
and narrowly drawn. We are seeking to establish clear
legal standards on expropriation, access to binding interna-
tional arbitration for disputes and unrestricted investment-
related transfers across borders. If successful, these negotia-
tions would help further our efforts on investment issues in
Asia and in the V\f|'O.

Preparing International Economic Institutions
for the 21st Century

At the initiative of President Clinton at the Naples
Economic Summit in 1994, the G-7 undertook an inten-
sive review of the international financial and economic
institutions to consider how to prepare them for the 21st
Century. At the following year's summit in Halifax,
Canada, the G-7 proposed a number of important reforms
and initiatives. These include measures to improve our
capacity to prevent and mitigate international financial
crises; the creation of a more effective early warning and

29

prevention system with an emphasis on improved disclo-
sure of financial and economic data; the establishment of a
new Emergency Financing Mechanism to provide the
means for a quick and surgical international response to
crises with systemic implications; a doubling of the
resources available under the General Arrangement to
Borrow, including from new participants with a stake in
the system; and instituting a review of procedures that
might facilitate the orderly resolution of international debt
crises in a financial environment characterized by a greater
diversity of creditors and financial instruments. Another
important area considered at Halifax concerns interna-
tional financial regulation. The G-7 leaders committed to
intensify cooperation among financial authorities to limit
systemic risk and pledged to develop and enhance safe-
guards, standards, transparency and systems to reduce risk.

At Halifax, the G-7 leaders also endorsed a blueprint for
reforms of the World Bank and the regional development
banks — reforms that the United States has been
promoting for two and a half years. Key elements include:
substantially increasing the share of resources devoted to
basic social programs that invest in people and are a
powerful force for poverty reduction, such as primary
education for girls and basic health care; focus on safe-
guarding the environment; support for development of the
private sector and the use of more innovative financial
instruments to catalyze private capital flows; and internal
reforms of the multilateral development banks, including
consolidation, decentralization, increased transparency
and cost reduction.

Providing for Energy Security

The United States depends on oil for more than 40% of its
primary energy needs. Roughly half of our oil needs are
met with imports, and a large share of these imports come
from the Persian Gulf area. The experiences of the two oil
shocks and the Gulf War show that an interruption of oil
supplies can have a significant impact on the economies of
the United States and its allies. Appropriate economic
responses can substantially mitigate the balance of
payments and inflationaw impacts of an oil shock; appro-
priate security policy responses to events such as Iraq's
invasion of Kuwait can limit the magnitude of the crisis.

Over the longer term, the United States’ dependence on

access to foreign oil sources will be increasingly important
as our resources are depleted. The U.S. economy has

30

grown roughly 75% since the first oil shock; yet during
that time our oil consumption has remained virtually stable
and oil production has declined. High oil prices did not
generate enough new oil exploration and discovery to
sustain production levels from our depleted resource base.
These fact show the need for continued and extended
reliance on energy efficiency and conservation and devel-
opment of alternative energy sources. Conservation
measures notwithstanding, the United States has a vital
interest in unrestricted access to this critical resource.

Promoting Sustainable Development
Abroad

Broad-based economic development not only improves
the prospects for democratic development in developing
countries but also expands the demands for U.S. exports.
Economic growth abroad can alleviate pressure on the
global environment, reduce the attraction of illegal
narcotics trade and improve the health and economic
productivity of global populations.

The environmental consequences of ill-designed economic
growth are clear. Environmental damage will ultimately
block economic growth. Rapid urbanization is outstripping
the ability of nations to provide jobs, education and other
services to new citizens. The continuing poverty of a
quarter of the world's people leads to hunger, malnutri-
tion, economic migration and political unrest. V\ﬁdespread
illiteracy and lack of technical skills hinder employment
opportunities and drive entire populations to support
themselves on increasingly fragile and damaged resource
bases. New diseases, such as AIDS, and other epidemics
which can be spread through environmental degradation,
threaten to overwhelm the health facilities of developing
countries, disrupt societies and stop economic growth.
Developing countries must address these realities with
national sustainable development policies that offer viable
alternatives. U.S. leadership is of the essence to facilitate
that process. If such alternatives are not developed, the
consequences for the planet's future will be grave indeed.

Domestically, the United States is working hard to halt
local and cross-border environmental degradation. In addi-
tion, the United States is fostering environmental tech-
nology that targets pollution prevention, control and
cleanup. Companies that invest in energy efficiency, clean
manufacturing and environmental services today will

create the high—quality, high-wage jobs of tomorrow. By
providing access to these types of technologies, our exports
can also provide the means for other nations to achieve
environmentally sustainable economic growth. At the same
ti me, we are taking ambitious steps at home to better
manage our natural resources and reduce energy and other
consumption, decrease waste generation and increase our
recycling efforts.

Internationally, the Administration's foreign assistance
program focuses on four key elements of sustainable devel-
opment: broad—based economic growth; the environment;
population and health; and democracy. We will continue
to advocate environmentally sound private investment and
responsible approaches by international lenders. As
mentioned above, the Multilateral Development Banks
(MDB's) are now placing increased emphasis upon sustain-
able development in their funding decisions, to include a
commitment to perform environmental assessments on
projects for both internal and public scrutiny. In particular,
the Global Environmental Facility (GEF), established in

I 994, provides a source of financial assistance to the
developing world for climate change, biodiversity and
oceans initiatives that will benefit all the world's citizens,
including Americans.

The United States is taking specific steps in all of these

EICESI

- In June 1993, the United States signed the
Convention on Biological Diversity, which aims to
protect and utilize the world's genetic inheritance.
The Interior Department created a National
Biological Service to help protect species and to help
the agricultural and biotechnical industries identify
new sources of food, fiber and medications.

- New policies are being implemented to ensure the
sustainable management of U.S. forests by the year
2000, as pledged internationally. In addition, U.S.
bilateral forest assistance programs are being
expanded, and the United States is promoting
sustainable management of tropical forest.

- In the wake of the 1992 United Nations Conference
on Environment and Development, the United States
has undertaken initiatives to reduce land-based
sources of marine pollution, maintain populations of
marine species at healthy and productive levels and
protect endangered marine mammals and coral reefs.

The United States has focused technical assistance
and encouraged nongovernmental environmental
groups to provide expertise to the new independent
states of the former Soviet Union and Central and
Eastern European nations that have suffered the most
acute environmental crises. The Agency for
International Development, the Environmental
Protection Agency and other U.S. agencies are
engaged in technical cooperation with many coun-
tries around the world to advance these goals. The
United States has also been working bilaterally with
a number of developing countries to promote their
sustainable development and to workjointly on
global environmental issues.

The Administration is leading a renewed global effort
to address population problems and promote inter-
national consensus for stabilizing world population
growth. Our comprehensive approach stresses family
planning and reproductive health care, maternal and
child health, education and improving the status of
women. The 1994 International Conference on
Population and Development held in Cairo,
endorsed these approaches as important strategies in
achieving our global population goals. At the 1995
UN Conference on Women in Beijing, the United
States promoted women's — and children's — inter-
national right.

With regard to the United Nations, the G-7 leaders at
the Halifax Summit in 1995 endorsed an ambitious
effort to modernize the organization's economic and
social functions through better coordination, consoli-
dation of related agencies, rethinking agency
mandates and creating an effective management
culture in a smaller and more focused Secretariat.
Following President Clinton's call for a UN reform
commission, the UN General Assembly established
the High Level Working Group on Strengthening the
UN System in September 1995.

In April 1993, President Clinton pledged that the
United States would reduce our greenhouse gas
emissions to 1990 levels by the year 2000, in accor-
dance with the Framework Convention on Climate
Change. In March 1995, we and other parties to the
Convention agreed to negotiate steps to be taken
beyond the year 2000. We are resolved to deal
forcefully with this threat to our planet while
preserving U.S. economic competitiveness.

31

- The United States and other countries have agreed to
protect the ozone layer by phasing out use of the
major ozone—depleting substances. In 1995, we also
agreed with other nations to decrease use of addi-
tional ozone—depleting chemicals.

Promoting Democracy

All of America's strategic interests — from promoting pros-
perity at home to checking global threats abroad before
they threaten our territory — are served by enlarging the
community of democratic and free—market nations. Thus,
working with new democratic states to help preserve them
as democracies committed to free markets and respect for
human rights, is a key part of our national security strategy.

One of the most gratifying and encouraging developments
of the past 15 years is the explosion in the number of states
moving away from repressive governance and toward
democracy. Since the success of many of those experi-
ments is by no means assured, our strategy of enlargement
must focus on the consolidation of those regimes and the
broadening of their commitment to democracy. At the
same time, we seek to increase respect for fundamental
human rights in all states and encourage an evolution to
democracy where that is possible.

The enlargement of the community of market democracies
respecting human rights and the environment is manifest
in a number of ways:

- More than 30 nations in Central and Eastern Europe,
the former Soviet Union, Latin America, Africa and
East Asia have, over the past 10 years, adopted the
structures of a constitutional democracy and held
free elections;

- The nations of the Western Hemisphere have
proclaimed their commitment to democratic regimes
and to the collective responsibility of the nations of
the OAS to respond to threats to democracy.

- In the Western Hemisphere, only Cuba is not a
democratic state.

' Nations as diverse as South Africa and Cambodia

have resolved bitter internal disputes with agreement
on the creation of constitutional democracies.

32

The first element of our enlargement strategy is to work
with the other democracies of the world and to improve
our cooperation with them on security and economic
issues. We also seek their support in enlarging the realm of
democratic nations.

The core of our strategy is to help democracy and free-
markets expand and survive in other places where we
have the strongest security concerns and where we can
make the greatest difference. This is not a democratic
crusade; it is a pragmatic commitment to see freedom take
hold where that will help us most. Thus, we must target
our effort to assist states that affect our strategic interests,
such as those with large economies, critical locations,
nuclear weapons or the potential to generate refugee ﬂows
into our own nation or into key friends and allies. We
must focus our efforts where we have the most leverage.
And our efforts must be demand—driven — they must focus
on nations whose people are pushing for reform or have
already secured it.

Russia is a key state in this regard. If we can support and
help consolidate democratic and market reforms in Russia
— and in the other new independent states — we can
help turn a former threat into a region of valued diplomatic
and economic partnership. Our intensified interaction with
Ukraine has helped move that country onto the path of
economic reform, which is critical to its long—term stability.
In addition, our efforts in Russia, Ukraine and the other
states support and facilitate our efforts to achieve
continued reductions in nuclear arms and compliance
with international nonproliferation accords.

The new democracies in Central and Eastern Europe are
another clear example, given their proximity to the great
democratic powers of Western Europe, their importance to
our security and their potential markets. Eventual integra-
tion into European security and economic organizations,
such as NATO and the EU, will help lock in and preserve
the impressive progress in instituting democratic and
market—economic reforms that these nations have made.

Since our ties across the Pacific are no less important than
those across the Atlantic, pursuing enlargement in the Asia
Pacific theater is a third example. We will work to support
the emerging democracies of the region and to encourage
other states along the same path.

Continuing the great strides toward democracy and
markets in our hemisphere is also a key concern and was
behind the President's decision to host the Summit of the
Americas in December 1994. As we continue such efforts,
we should be on the lookout for states whose entry into
the camp of market democracies may influence the future
direction of an entire region; South Africa now holds that
potential with regard to sub-Saharan Africa.

How should the United States help consolidate and
enlarge democracy and markets in these states? The
answers are as varied as the nations involved, but there are
common elements. We must continue to help lead the
effort to mobilize international resources, as we have with
Russia, Ukraine and the other new independent states. We
must be willing to take immediate public positions to help
staunch democratic reversals, as we have in Haiti and
Guatemala. We must give democratic nations the fullest
benefits of integration into foreign markets, which is part of
why NAFTA and the Uruguay Round of GATT ranked so
high on our agenda. And we must help these nations
strengthen the pillars of civil society, improve their market
institutions and fight corruption and political discontent
through practices of good governance.

At the same time as we work to ensure the success of
emerging democracies, we must also redouble our efforts
to guarantee basic human rights on a global basis. At the

I 993 United Nations Conference on Human Rights, the
United States forcefully and successfully argued for a reaf-
firmation of the universality of such rights and improved
international mechanisms for their promotion. In the wake
of this gathering, the UN has named a High Commissioner
for Human Rights, and the rights of women have been
afforded a new international precedence. The United
States has taken the lead in assisting the UN to set up inter-
national tribunals to enforce accountability for the war
crimes in the former Yugoslavia and in Rwanda. And the
President has endorsed the creation of a Permanent
Criminal Court to address violations of international
humanitarian law.

The United States also continues to work for the protection
of human rights on a bilateral basis. To demonstrate our
own willingness to adhere to international human rights
standards, the United States ratified the international
convention prohibiting discrimination on the basis of race
and the President signed the international convention on
the rights of the child. The Administration is seeking Senate

consent to ratification for the convention prohibiting
discrimination against women. The United States played a
major role in promoting women's rights internationally at
the UN Women's Conference in September.

In all these efforts, a policy of engagement and enlarge-
ment should take on a second meaning: we should pursue
our goals through an enlarged circle not only of govern-
ment officials but also of private and nongovernmental
groups. Private ﬁrms are natural allies in our efforts to
strengthen market economies. Similarly, our goal of
strengthening democracy and civil society has a natural
ally in labor unions, human rights groups, environmental
advocates, chambers of commerce and election monitors.
Just as we rely on force multipliers in defense, we should
welcome these diplomacy multipliers, such as the
National Endowment for Democracy.

Supporting the global movement toward democracy
requires a pragmatic and long—term effort focused on both
values and institutions. The United States must build on
the opportunities achieved through the successful conclu-
sion of the Cold War. Our long—term goal is a world in
which each of the major powers is democratic, with many
other nations joining the community of market democra-
cies as well.

Our efforts to promote democracy and human rights are
complemented by our humanitarian assistance programs
which are designed to alleviate human suffering and to
pave the way for progress towards establishing democratic
regimes with a commitment to respect for human rights
and appropriate strategies for economic development. We
are encouraging ideas such as the suggestion of
Argentina's President Menem for the creation of an inter-
national civilian rapid response capability for humanitarian
crises, including a school and training for humanitarian
operations.

Through humanitarian assistance and policy initiatives
aimed at the sources of disruption, we seekto mitigate the
contemporary migration and refugee crises, foster long-
term global cooperation and strengthen involved interna-
tional institutions. The United States will provide appro-
priate financial support and will work with other nations
and international bodies, such as the International Red
Cross and the UN High Commissionerfor Refugees, in
seeking voluntaw repatriation of refugees — taking into
full consideration human rights concerns as well as the

33

economic conditions that may have driven them out in the
first place. Helping refugees return to their homes in
Mozambique, Afghanistan, Eritrea, Somalia and
Guatemala, for example, is a high priority.

Relief efforts will continue for people displaced by the
conflict in Bosnia and other republics of the former
Yugoslavia. We will act in concert with other nations and

34

the UN against the illegal smuggling of aliens into this
country. In concert with the tools of diplomatic, economic
and military power, our humanitarian and refugee policies
can bear results, as was evident in Haiti. We provided
temporary safe haven at Guantanamo Naval Base for those
Haitians who feared for their safety and left by sea until we
helped restore democracy.

III. Integrated Regional Approaches

The United States is a genuinely global power. Our policy
toward each of the world's regions reflects our overall
strategy tailored to their unique challenges and opportuni-
ties. This section highlights the application of our strategy
to each of the world's regions; our broad objectives and
thrust, rather than an exhaustive list of all our policies and
interests. It illustrates how we integrate our commitment to
the promotion of democracy and the enhancement of
American prosperity with our security requirements to
produce a mutually reinforcing policy.

Europe and Eurasia

Our strategy of engagement and enlargement is central to
U.S. policy toward Europe. European stability is vital to our
own security, a lesson we have learned twice at great cost
this century. Vibrant European economies mean more jobs
for Americans at home and investment opportunities
abroad. With the collapse of the Soviet empire and the
emergence of many new democratizing states in its wake,
the United States has an unparalleled opportunity to
contribute toward a free and undivided Europe. Our goal is
an integrated democratic Europe cooperating with the
United States to keep the peace and promote prosperity.

The first and most important element of our strategy in
Europe must be security through military strength and
cooperation. The Cold War is over, but war itself is not
over.

We must work with our allies to ensure that the hard-won
peace in the former Yugoslavia will survive and flourish
after four years of war. U.S. policy is focused on five goals:

sustaining a political settlement in Bosnia that preserves the
countw's territorial integrity and provides a viable future
for all its peoples; preventing the spread of the conflict into
a broader Balkan war that could threaten both allies and
the stability of new democratic states in Central and
Eastern Europe; stemming the destabilizing flow of refugees
from the conflict; halting the slaughter of innocents; and
helping to support NATO's central role in Europe while
maintaining our role in shaping Europe's security architec-
ture.

Our leadership paved the way to NATO's February 1994
ulti matum that ended the heavy Serb bombardment of
Sarajevo, Bosnia's capital. Our diplomatic leadership then
brought an end to the fighting between the Muslims and
Croats in Bosnia and helped establish a bicommunal
Bosnian-Croat Federation. In April 1994, we began
working with the warring parties through the Contact
Group (United States, Russia, United Kingdom, France and
Germany) to help the parties reach a negotiated settlement.

This past summer, following Bosnian Serb attacks on the
safe areas of Srebrenica and Zepa and in response to the
brutal shelling of Sarajevo, the United States led NATO's
heavy and continuous air strikes. At the same time,
President Clinton launched a new diplomatic initiative
aimed at ending the conflict for good. Intensive diplomatic
efforts by our negotiators forged a Bosnia—wide cease—fire
and got the parties to agree to the basic principles of
peace. Three dedicated American diplomat — Robert
Frasure, Joseph Kruzel and Nelson Drew— lost their lives
in that effort.

35

Three intensive weeks of negotiations, led by the United
States last November, produced the Dayton Peace
Agreement. In the agreement, the parties committed to put
down their guns; to preserve Bosnia as a single state; to
investigate and prosecute war criminals; to protect the
human rights of all citizens; and to try to build a peaceful,
democratic future. And they asked for help from the
United States and the international community in imple-
menting the peace agreement.

Following the signature of the peace agreement in Paris on
December 14, U.S. forces deployed to Bosnia as part ofa
NATO—led peace Implementation Force (IFOR). These
forces, along with those of some 25 other nations,
including all of our NATO allies, are working to ensure a
stable and secure environment so that the parties have the
confidence to carry out their obligations under the Dayton
agreement. lFOR's task is limited to assisting the parties in
Implementing the military aspects of the peace agreement,
including monitoring the cease—fire, monitoring and
enforcing the withdrawal of forces and establishing and
manning the zone of separation.

We anticipate a one-year mission for IFOR in Bosnia. The
parties to the agreement have speciﬁc dates by which each
stage of their obligations must be carried out, which started
with the separation of forces within 30 days after IFOR
assumed authority from UNPROFOR, and continuing with
the removal of forces and heavy weapons to garrisons
within 120 days.

During the second six months, IFOR will continue to main-
tain a stable and secure environment and prepare for and
undertake an orderly drawdown of forces, while the parties
themselves will continue to work with the international
community to carry out the nonmilitary activities called for
by the agreement. We believe that by the end of the first
year we will have helped create a secure environment so
that the people of Bosnia can travel freely throughout the
country, vote in free elections and begin to rebuild their
lives.

Civilian tasks of rebuilding, reconstruction, return of
refugees arid human rights monitoring, which are
absolutely essential to making the peace endure, have
been undertaken by the entire international community
under civilian coordination. International aid agencies are
helping the people of Bosnia rebuild to meet the imme-
diate needs of survival. There also is a long—term interna-

36

tional reconstruction effort to repair the devastation
brought about by years of war. This broad civilian effort is
helping the people of Bosnia to rebuild, reuniting children
with their parents and families with their homes and will
allow the Bosnian people to choose freely their own
leaders. It will give them a much greater stake in peace
than war, so that peace takes on a life and a logic of its
own.

We expect to contribute some $600 million over the next
3-4 years to reconstruction and relief funding. In view of
the large role that U.S. forces are playing in implementing
the military aspects of the agreement, we believe it is
appropriate for Europe to contribute the largest share of the
funds for reconstruction. The European Union has taken
the lead in these efforts in tandem with the international
financial institutions, in particularthe World Bank. The
Japanese and Islamic countries also are prepared to make
signiﬁcant contributions.

An important element of our exit strategy for IFOR is our
commitment to achieving a stable military balance within
Bosnia and among the states of the former Yugoslavia by
the time IFOR withdraws. This balance will help reduce
the incentives of the parties to return to war. This balance
should be achieved, to the extent possible, through arms
limitations and reductions, and the Dayton agreement
contains signiﬁcant measures in this regard.

But even with the implementation of the arms control
provisions, the armed forces of the Federation, which have
been the most severely constrained by the arms embargo,
will still be at a disadvantage. Accordingly, we have made
a commitment to the Bosnian government that we will
play a leadership role in ensuring that the Federation
receives the assistance necessary to adequately defend
itself when IFOR leaves. However, because we want to
assure the impartiality of IFOR, providing arms and
training to Federation forces will not be done by either
IFOR or U.S. militaw forces. The approach we intend to
pursue forthe United States is to coordinate the efforts of

third countries and to lead an international effort, with U.S.

involvement in the execution of the program to be done
by contractors.

Our efforts in this connection already have begun. An
assessment team to evaluate the needs of the Federation
visited Bosnia in November 1995 and made recommenda-
tions regarding the Federation's defense requirements. A

special task force has been established at the Department
of State to work with other interested states and to identify
the best sources of essential equipment and training. We
will proceed with this effort in a manner that is consistent
with the UN resolution lifting the arms embargo, which
allows planning and training to proceed immediately but
prohibits the introduction of weapons to the region for
three months and the transfer of heavy weapons for six
months.

As we work to resolve the tragedy of Bosnia and ease the
suffering of its victims, we also need to transform European
and transatlantic institutions so they can better address
such conflicts and advance Europe's integration. Many
institutions will play a role, including the European Union
(EU), the Western European Union (WEU), the Council of
Europe (CE), the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) and the United Nations. But NATO,
history's greatest political-military alliance, must be central
to that process.

The NATO alliance will remain the anchor of American
engagement in Europe and the linchpin of transatlantic
security. That is why we must keep it strong, vital and rele-
vant. For the United States and its allies, NATO has always
been far more than a transitory response to a temporary
threat. It has been a guarantor of European democracy and
a force for European stability. That is why its mission
endures even though the Cold War has receded into the
past. And that is why its benefit are so clear to Europe's
new democracies.

Only NATO has the military forces, the integrated
command structure, the broad legitimacy and the habits of
cooperation that are essential to draw in new participants
and respond to new challenges. One of the deepest trans-
formations within the transatlantic community over the
past half-century occurred because the armed forces of our
respective nations trained, studied and marched through
their careers together. It is not only the compatibility of our
weapons but the camaraderie of our warriors that provide
the sinews behind our mutual security guarantees and our
best hope for peace. In this regard, we applaud France's
decision to resume its participation in NATO's defense
councils.

The United States has significantly reduced the level of
U.S. military forces stationed in Europe. We have deter-
mined that a force of roughly 100,000 U.S. military

personnel assigned to the U.S. European Command will
preserve U.S. influence and leadership in NATO and
provide a deterrent posture that is visible to all Europeans.
While we continue to examine the proper mix of forces,
this level of permanent presence, augmented by forward
deployed naval forces and reinforcements available from
the United States, is sufficient to respond to plausible crises
and contributes to stability in the region. Such a force level
also provides a sound basis for U.S. participation in multi-
national training and preserves the capability to deter or
respond to larger threats in Europe and to support limited
NATO operations out of area.

NATO's mission is evolving, and the Alliance will
continue to adapt to the many changes brought about in
the aftermath of the end of the Cold War. Today, NATO
plays a crucial role helping to manage ethnic and national
conflict in Europe. V\ﬁth U.S. leadership, NATO has
provided the muscle behind efforts to bring about a
peaceful settlement in the former Yugoslavia. NATO air
power enforced the UN-mandated no-fly zone and
provided support to UN peacekeepers. NATO is now
helping to implement the peace after the parties reached
an agreement.

V\ﬁth the adoption of the U.S. initiative, Partnershipfor
Peace, at the January 1994 summit, NATO is playing an
increasingly important role in our strategy of European
integration, extending the scope of our security coopera-
tion to the new democracies of Central and Eastern Europe
and the former Soviet Union. 27 nations, including Russia,
have already joined the Partnership, which will pave the
way for a growing program of military cooperation and
political consultation. Partner countries are sending repre-
sentatives to NATO headquarters near Brussels and to a
military coordination cell at Mons — the site of Supreme
Headquarters Allied Powers Europe (SHAPE). Combined
exercises have taken place in virtually all of the Partners’
countries and NATO nations. In keeping with our strategy
ofenlargement, PFP is open to all former members of the
Warsaw Pact as well as other European states. Each
partner will set the scope and pace of its cooperation with
NATO. To facilitate progress toward PFP objectives, the
U.S. Warsaw Initiative Program is directing $100 million
to Partner nations this year.

The success of NATO's Partnership for Peace process and

the increasing links developed between NATO and Partner
nations have also begun to lay the foundation for the

37

Partners to contribute to real-world NATO missions such
as the IFOR operation, Joint Endeavor. The participation of
over a dozen Partner nations in IFOR demonstrates the
value of our efforts to date and will contribute to the
further integration of Europe.

The North Atlantic Treaty has always been open to the
addition of members who shared the Alliance's purposes
and its values, its commitment to respect borders and inter-
national law and who could add to its strength; indeed,
NATO has expanded three times since its creation. In
January 1994, President Clinton made it plain that "the
question is no longer whether NATO will take on new
members but when and how we will do so." The following
December, we and our Allies began a steady, measured
and transparent process that will lead to NATO enlarge-
ment. During 1995, the Alliance carried out the first phase
in this process, by conducting a study of the process and
principles that would guide the bringing in of new
members. This enlargement study was completed in
September 1995 and presented to interested members of
the Partnership for Peace (PFP).

At its December 1995 foreign ministers meeting in
Brussels, NATO announced the launching of the second
phase of the enlargement process. All interested members
of the Partnership for Peace will be invited, beginning in
early 1996, to participate in intensive bilateral consulta-
tions with NATO aimed at helping them prepare for
possible NATO membership. Participation will not guar-
antee that a participant will be invited to begin accession
talks with NATO. Any such decision will be taken by
NATO at a time of its own choosing, based on an overall
assessment of Alliance security and interests. As part of this
phase, NATO will also expand and deepen the Partnership
for Peace, both as a means to further the enlargement
process, but also to intensify relations between NATO and
all members of the PFP. The second phase in the enlarge-
ment process will continue through 1996 and be reviewed
and assessed by NATO foreign ministers at their December
1996 meeting.

Enlarging the Alliance will promote our interests by
reducing the risk of instability or conflict in Europe's
eastern half — the region where two world wars and the
Cold War began. It will help assure that no part of Europe
will revert to a zone of great power competition or a
sphere of influence. ltwill build confidence and give new
democracies a powerful incentive to consolidate their
reforms. And each potential member will bejudged

38

according to the strength of its democratic institutions and
its capacity to contribute to the goals of the Alliance.

As the President has made clear, NATO enlargement will
not be aimed at replacing one division of Europe with a
new one; rather, its purpose is to enhance the security of
all European states, members and nonmembers alike. In
this regard, we have a major stake in ensuring that Russia
is engaged as a vital participant in European security
affairs. We are committed to a growing, healthy NATO-
Russia relationship, including a mechanism for regular
consultations on common concerns. The current NATO-
Russia cooperation on Bosnia is a great stride forward.
Also, we want to see Russia closely involved in the
Partnership for Peace. Recognizing that no single institu-
tion can meet every challenge to peace and stability in
Europe, we have begun a process that will strengthen the
OSCE and enhance its conflict prevention and peace-
keeping capabilities.

The second element of the new strategy for Europe is
economic. The United States seeks to build on vibrant and
open-market economies, the engines that have given us
the greatest prosperity in human history over the last
several decades in Europe and in the United States. To this
end, we strongly supportthe process of European integra-
tion embodied in the European Union and seekto deepen
our partnership with the EU in support of our economic
goals, but also commit ourselves to the encouragement of
bilateral trade and investment in countries not part of the
EU. The United States supports appropriate enlargement of
the European Union and welcomes the European Union's
Customs Union with Turkey.

The nations of the European Union face particularly signifi-
cant economic challenges with nearly 20 million people
unemployed and, in Germany's case, the extraordinarily
high costs of unification. Among the Atlantic nations,
economic stagnation has clearly eroded public support in
finances for outward-looking foreign policies and for
greater integration. We are working closely with our West
European partners to expand employment and promote
long—term growth, building on the results of the Detroit
Jobs Conference and the Naples G-7 Summit in 1994. In
December 1995, the U.S. and EU launched the New
Transatlantic Agenda, which moves the U.S.-EU relation-
ship from consultation to joint action on a range of shared
interests, including promoting peace, stability, democracy
and development; responding to global challenges; and
contributing to the expansion of world trade and closer
economic relations.

In Northern Ireland, the Administration is implementing a
package of initiatives to promote the peace process,
including a successful trade mission, a management intern
exchange program and cooperation to promote tourism.
The White House Conference on Trade and Investment,
held in May 1995, has led to new partnerships between
firms in the United States and Northern Ireland that benefit
both economies. The President's visit to Northern Ireland
in November 1995, the first ever by an American
President, drew an unprecedented wave of popular
support for peace. We are continuing our support for
investment and trade in Northern Ireland to create jobs
that will underpin hopes for peace and reconciliation.

As we work to strengthen our own economies, we must
know that we serve our own prosperity and our security by
helping the new market reforms in the new democracies in
Europe's East, which will help to deﬁate the region's
demagogues. It will help ease ethnic tensions; it will help
new democracies take root.

In Russia, Ukraine and the other new independent states of
the former Soviet Union, the economic transformation they
are undertaking is historical. The Russian Government has
made substantial progress toward privatizing the economy
(over 60 percent of the Russian Gross Domestic Product is
now generated by the private sector) and reducing infla-
tion, and Ukraine has taken bold steps of its own to insti-
tute much-needed economic reforms. But much remains
to be done to build on the reform momentum to assure
durable economic recovery and social protection.
President Clinton has given strong and consistent support
to this unprecedented reform effort and has mobilized the
international community to provide structural economic
assistance; for example, by securing agreement by the G-7
to make available four billion dollars in grants and loans as
Ukraine has implemented economic reform. Through the
Gore-Chernomyrdin Commission, the United States is
working closely with Russia in priority areas, including
defense, trade and science and technology.

The short-term difficulties of taking Central and Eastern
Europe into Western economic institutions will be more
than rewarded if they succeed and if they are customers
for America's and Western Europe's goods and services
tomorrow. That is why this Administration has been
committed to increase support substantially for market
reforms in the new states of the former Soviet Union and
why we have continued our support for economic transi-

tion in Central and Eastern Europe, while also paying
attention to measures that can overcome the social dislo-
cations which have resulted largely from the collapse of
the Soviet-dominated regional trading system. One step
was a White House sponsored Trade and Investment
Conference for Central and Eastern Europe, which took
place in Cleveland in January, 1995.

Ultimately, the success of market reforms to the East will
depend more on trade and investment than official aid. No
one nation has enough resources to markedly change the
future of those countries as they move to free market
systems. One of our priorities, therefore, is to reduce trade
barriers with the former communist states.

The third and final imperative of this new strategy is to
support the growth of democracy and individual freedoms
that has begun in Russia, the nations of the former Soviet
Union and Europe's former communist states. The success
of these democratic reforms makes us all more secure;
they are the best answer to the aggressive nationalism and
ethnic hatreds unleashed by the end of the Cold War.
Nowhere is democracy's success more important to us all
than in these countries.

This will be the work of generations. There will be wrong
turns and even reversals, as there have been in all coun-
tries throughout history. But as long as these states
continue their progress toward democracy and respect the
rights of their own and other people, and they understand
the rights of their minorities and their neighbors, we will
support their progress with a steady patience.

East Asia and the Pacific

East Asia is a region of growing importance for U.S. secu-
rity and prosperity; nowhere are the strands of ourthree-
pronged strategy more intertwined nor is the need for
continued U.S. engagement more evident. Now more than
ever, security, open markets and democracy go hand in
hand in our approach to this dynamic region. In 1993,
President Clinton laid out an integrated strategy — a New
Pacific Community —which links security requirements
with economic realities and our concern for democracy
and human rights.

In thinking about Asia, we must remember that security is
the first pillar of our new Pacific community. The United

39

States is a Pacific nation. We have fought three wars there
in this century. To deter regional aggression and secure our
own interests, we will maintain an active presence, and we
will continue to lead. Our deep, bilateral ties with such
allies as Japan, South Korea, Australia, Thailand and the
Philippines, and a continued American military presence
will serve as the foundation for America's security role in
the region. Currently, ourforces number nearly 100,000
personnel in East Asia. In addition to performing the
general forward deployment functions outlined above, they
contribute to regional stability by deterring aggression and
adventurism.

As a key element of our strategic commitment to the
region, we are pursuing stronger efforts to combat the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction on the Korean
Peninsula. In October 1994, we reached an important
Agreed Framework committing North Korea to halt and
eventually eliminate, its existing, dangerous nuclear
program — and an agreement with China, restricting the
transfer of ballistic missiles.

Another example of our security commitment to the Asia
Pacific region in this decade is our effort to develop
multiple new arrangements to meet multiple threats and
opportunities. We have supported new regional dialogues
— such as the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) — on the full
range of common security challenges. The second ARF
Ministerial, held in August 1995, made significant progress
in addressing key security issues such as the Korean
Peninsula and the South China Sea. It also agreed to inters-
essional meetings on confidence-building measures such
as search and rescue cooperation and peacekeeping. Such
regional arrangements can enhance regional security and
understanding through improved confidence and trans-
parency. These regional exchanges are grounded on the
strong network of bilateral relationships that exist today.

The continuing tensions on the Korean Peninsula remain
the principal threat to the peace and stability of the Asian
region. We have worked diligently with our South Korean
and Japanese allies, with the People's Republic of China
and with Russia, and with various UN organizations to
resolve the problem of North Korea's nuclear program.
Throughout 1995, we successfully took the initial steps to
implement the U.S.-North Korea nuclear agreement, begin-
ning With IAEA monitoring of the North Korean nuclear
freeze of its plutonium reprocessing plant and of its
construction of two larger plants and an expanded repro-

40

cessing facility. In March 1995, a U.S.—led effort with Japan
and the Republic of Korea successfully established the
Korean Peninsula Energy Development Organization
(KEDO), which will finance and supply the light-water
reactor project to North Korea. The reactor will, over a ten-
year period, replace North Korea's more dangerous, pluto-
nium producing reactors. In December 1995, KEDO and
North Korea reached agreement on a comprehensive
supply contract for the light-water reactor project as part of
the overall plan to replace North Korea's existing,
dangerous nuclear program. KEDO also supplied heavy
fuel oil to offset the energy from the frozen reactor projects
and took measures to safely store spent nuclearfuel in
North Korea, pending its final removal under the terms of
the Agreed Framework. That effort will be accompanied by
a willingness to improve bilateral political and economic
ties with the North, commensurate with their continued
cooperation to resolve the nuclear issue and to make
progress on other issues of concern, such as improved
North-South Korean relations and missile proliferation. Our
goal remains a non-nuclear, peacefully reunified Korean
Peninsula. Our strong and active commitment to our South
Korean allies and to the region is the foundation of this
effort.

A stable, open, prosperous and strong China is important
to the United States and to ourfriends and allies in the
region. A stable and open China is more likely to work
cooperatively with others and to contribute positively to
peace in the region and to respect the rights and interests
of its people. A prosperous China will provide an
expanding market for American goods and services. We
have a profound stake in helping to ensure that China
pursues its modernization in ways that contribute to the
overall security and prosperity of the Asia Pacific region.
To that end, we strongly promote China's participation in
regional security mechanisms to reassure it neighbors and
assuage it own security concerns.

In support of these objectives, we have adopted a policy of
comprehensive engagement designed to integrate China
into the international community as a responsible member
and to foster bilateral cooperation in areas of common
interest. At the same time, we are seeking to resolve impor-
tant differences in areas of concern to the United States,
such as human rights, proliferation and trade. The United
States continues to follow its long-standing "one China"
policy; at the same time, we maintain fruitful unofficial
relations with the people in Taiwan, a policy that

contributes to regional security and economic dynamism.
We have made clear that the resolution of issues between
Taiwan and the PRC should be peaceful.

On July 11, 1995, the President normalized relations with
Vietnam. This step was taken in recognition of the progress
that had been made in accounting for missing Americans
from the Vietnam war and to encourage continued
progress by Vietnam in the accounting process. This action
also served to help bring Vietnam into the community of
nations. Vietnam's strategic position in Southeast Asia
makes it a pivotal player in ensuring a stable and peaceful
region. In expanding dialogue with Vietnam, the United
States will continue to encourage it along the path toward
economic reform and democracy, with its entry into
ASEAN a move along this path.

The second pillar of our engagement in Asia is our
commitment to continuing and enhancing the economic
prosperity that has characterized the region. Opportunities
for economic progress continue to abound in Asia and
underlie our strong commitment to multilateral economic
cooperation, principally through APEC. Today, the 18
member states of APEC — comprising about one-third of
the world's population, including Mexico and Canada —
produce $13 trillion and export $1.7 trillion of goods
annually, about one-half of the world's totals. U.S. exports
to Asian economies reached $150 billion in 1994,
supporting nearly 2.9 million American jobs. U.S. direct
investments in Asia totaled over $108 billion — about
one-fifth of total U.S. direct foreign investment. A pros-
perous and open Asia Pacific is key to the economic
health of the United States. Annual APEC leaders meetings,
initiated in 1993 by President Clinton, are vivid testi-
monies to the possibilities of stimulating regional
economic cooperation. As confidence in APEC's potential
grows, it will pay additional dividends in enhancing polit-
ical and security ties within the region.

We are also working with our major bilateral trade part-
ners to improve trade relations. The U.S. and Japan have
successfully completed 20 bilateral trade agreements in the
wake of the 1993 Framework Agreement, designed to
open Japan's markets more to competitive U.S. goods and
reduce the U.S. trade deficit. As U.S.-China trade
continues to grow significantly, we must work closely with
Beijing to resolve remaining bilateral and multilateral trade
problems, such as intellectual property right and market
access. In February 1995, the United States reached a

bilateral agreement with China on intellectual property
rights, potentially saving U.S. companies billions of dollars
in revenues lost because of piracy. China's accession to
the \/VTO is also an important objective for the United
States. The United States and other V\f|'O members have
made it clear that China must join the \/VTO on commer-
cial terms.

The third pillar of our policy in building a new Pacific
community is to support democratic reform in the region.
The new democratic states of Asia will have our strong
support as they move forward to consolidate and expand
democratic reforms.

Some have argued that democracy is somehow unsuited
for Asia or at least for some Asian nations — that human
rights are relative and that they simply mask Western
cultural imperialism. These arguments are wrong. It is not
Western imperialism but the aspirations of Asian peoples
themselves that explain the growing number of democra-
cies and the growing strength of democracy movements
everywhere in Asia. We support those aspirations and
those movement.

Each nation must find its own form of democracy, and we
respect the variety of democratic institutions that have
grown in Asia. But there is no cultural justification for
torture or tyranny. Nor do we accept repression cloaked in
moral relativism. Democracy and human rights are
universal yearnings and universal norms, just as powerful
in Asia as elsewhere. We will continue to press for
improved respect for human right in such countries as
China, Vietnam and Burma.

The Western Hemisphere

The Western Hemisphere, too, is a fertile field for a
strategy of engagement and enlargement. Sustained
improvements in the security situation there, including the
resolution of border tensions, control of insurgencies and
containment of pressures for arms proliferation, will be an
essential underpinning of political and economic progress
in the hemisphere.

The unprecedented triumph of democracy and market
economies throughout the region offers an unparalleled
opportunity to secure the benefits of peace and stability
and to promote economic growth and trade. At the

41

Summit of the Americas, which President Clinton hosted in
December 1994, the 34 democratic nations of the hemi-
sphere committed themselves forthe first time to the goal
of free trade in the region by 2005. They also agreed to a
detailed plan of cooperative action in such diverse fields as
health, education, science and technology, environmental
protection and the strengthening of democratic institutions.
A series of follow-on ministerial meetings have already
begun the important work of implementing an action plan,
with the active participation of the Organization of
American States and the Inter-American Development
Bank. Over the last year Summit partners have worked
together to improve regional security, block the activities of
international criminals, counter corruption and increase
opportunities for health, education and prosperity for resi-
dents of the hemisphere. The Summit ushered in a new era
of hemispheric cooperation that would not have been
possible without U.S. leadership and commitment.

NAFTA, ratified in December 1994, has strengthened
economic ties, with substantial increases in U.S. exports to
both Mexico and Canada, creating newjobs and new
opportunities for American workers and business. We have
also begun negotiations with Chile to join NAFTA. And in
the security sphere, negotiations with Canada will extend
the North American Air Defense (NORAD) Agreement
through 2001.

We remain committed to extending democracy to all of
the region's people still blocked from controlling their own
destinies. Our overarching objective is to preserve and
defend civilian-elected governments and strengthen demo-
cratic practices respectful of human rights. Working with
the international community, we succeeded in reversing
the coup in Haiti and restoring the democratically elected
president and government. Over the past year, the United
States and the international community have helped the
people of Haiti consolidate their hard-won democracy and
organize free and fair elections at all levels. Haitians were
able to choose their representatives in the Senate, the
Chamber of Deputies and at the local level. And, for the
first ti me in its histow, Haiti experienced a peaceful transi-
tion between two democratically elected presidents.

V\ﬁth the restoration of democracy in Haiti, Cuba is the
only country in the hemisphere still ruled by a dictator.
The Cuban Democracy Act remains the framework for our
policy toward Cuba; our goal is the peaceful establishment
of democratic governance for the people of Cuba. In

42

October, the United States took steps to invigorate our
efforts to promote the cause of peaceful change in Cuba.
These measures tighten the enforcement of our economic
embargo against the Cuban regime and enhance our
contacts with the Cuban people through an increase in the
free flow of information and ideas. By reaching out to
nongovernmental organizations, churches, human right
groups and other elements of Cuba's civil society, we will
strengthen the agents of peaceful change.

We are working with our neighbors through various hemi-
spheric organizations, including the OAS, to invigorate
regional cooperation. Both bilaterally and regionally, we
seekto eliminate the scourge of drug trafficking, which
poses a serious threat to democracy and security. We also
seek to strengthen norms for defense establishment that
are supportive of democracy, respect for human rights and
civilian control in defense matters. The Defense Ministerial
of the Americas hosted by the United States in July 1995,
and "The V\ﬁ||iamsburg Principles" which resulted from it,
were a significant step in this effort. Working with our Latin
American partners who make up the "guarantor countries",
we also began to move toward a permanent resolution of
the Peru-Ecuador border dispute. In addition, a highly
successful Organization of American States conference on
regional Conﬁdence and Security Building Measures was
held in Santiago, Chile.

Protecting the region's precious environmental resources is
also an important priority.

The Middle East, Southwest and
South Asia

The United States has enduring interest in the Middle East,
especially in pursuing a lasting and comprehensive Middle
East peace, assuring the security of Israel and our Arab
friends and maintaining the free flow of oil at reasonable
prices. Our strategy is harnessed to the unique characteris-
tics of the region and our vital interests there, as we work
to extend the range of peace and stability.

We have made solid progress in the past three years. The
President's efforts helped bring about many historic firsts —
the handshake of peace between Prime Minister Rabin and
Chairman Arafat on the White House lawn has been
followed by the Jordan-Israel peace treaty, the Israeli-

Palestinian Interim Agreement, progress on eliminating the
Arab boycott of Israel and the establishment of ties
between Israel and an increasing number of its Arab neigh-
bors. But our efforts have not stopped there; on other bilat-
eral tracks and through regional dialogue we are working
to foster a durable peace and a comprehensive settlement,
while our support for economic development can bring
hope to all the peoples of the region.

In Southwest Asia, the United States remains focused on
deterring threats to regional stability, particularly from Iraq
and Iran as long as those states pose a threat to U.S. inter-
ests, to other states in the region and to their own citizens.
We have in place a dual containment strategy aimed at
these two states and will maintain our long-standing pres-
ence, which has been centered on naval vessels in and
near the Persian Gulf and prepositioned combat equip-
ment. Since Operation Desert Storm, temporaw deploy-
ments of land-based aviation forces, ground forces and
amphibious units have supplemented our posture in the
Gulf region. The October 1994 deployment for Operation
Vigilant Warrior demonstrated again our ability to rapidly
reinforce the region in time of crisis and respond quickly to
threats to our allies.

We have made clear that Iraq must comply with all the
relevant Security Council resolutions. We also remain
committed to preventing the oppression of Iraq's people
through Operations Provide Comfort and Southern Watch.
Our policy is directed not against the people of Iraq but
against the aggressive behavior of the government.

Our policy toward Iran is aimed at changing the behavior
of the Iranian government in several key areas, including
Iran's efforts to obtain weapons of mass destruction and
missiles, its support for terrorism and groups that oppose
the peace process, its attempts to undermine friendly
governments in the region and its dismal human rights
record. We remain willing to enter into an authoritative
dialogue with Iran to discuss the differences between us.

A key objective of our policy in the Gulf is to reduce the
chances that another aggressor will emerge who would
threaten the independence of existing states. Therefore, we
will continue to encourage members of the Gulf
Cooperation Council (GCC) to work closely on collective
defense and security arrangements, help individual GCC
states meet their appropriate defense requirements and
maintain our bilateral defense agreements.

South Asia has experienced an important expansion of

democracy and economic reform, and our strategy is
designed to help the peoples of that region enjoy the fruit
of democracy and greater stability through efforts aimed at
resolving long-standing conflict and implementing confi-
dence-building measures. The United States has engaged
India and Pakistan in seeking agreement on steps to cap,
reduce and ultimately eliminate their capabilities for
weapons of mass destruction and ballistic missiles.
Regional stability and improved bilateral ties are also
important for America's economic interest in a region that
contains a quarter of the world's population and one of its
most important emerging markets.

In both the Middle East and South Asia, the pressure of
expanding populations on natural resources is enormous.
Growing desertification in the Middle East has strained
relations over arable land. Pollution of the coastal areas in
the Eastern Mediterranean, the Red Sea and the Gulf of
Aqaba has degraded fish catches and hindered develop-
ment. Water shortages stemming from overuse, contami-
nated water aquifers and riparian disputes threaten
regional relations. In South Asia, high population densities
and rampant pollution have exacted a tremendous toll on
forests, biodiversity and the local environment.

Africa

Africa poses one of our greatest challenges and opportuni-
ties to enlarge the community of market democracies.
Significant changes have been made in Africa in recent
years: multi-party systems have become more common;
new constitutions have been promulgated; elections have
become more open; the press generally has more freedom
today; and the need for budgetary and financial discipline
is better understood. Throughout Africa, U.S. policies have
supported these developments. Specifically, our policies
have promoted democracy, respect for human rights,
sustainable economic development and resolution of
conflicts through negotiation, diplomacy and peace-
keeping. New policies will strengthen civil societies and
mechanisms for conflict resolution, particularly where
ethnic, religious and political tensions are acute. In partic-
ular, we will seekto identify and address the root causes of
conflicts and disasters before they erupt.

The compounding of economic, political, social, ethnic

and environmental challenges facing Africa can lead to a
sense of 'Afro-pessimism.’ However, if we can simultane-

43

ously address these challenges, we create a synergy that
can stimulate development, resurrect societies and build
hope. We encourage democratic reform in nations like
Zaire and Sudan to allow the people of these countries to
enjoy responsive government. In Nigeria, we have strongly
condemned the government's brutal human rights viola-
tions and support efforts to help encourage a return to
democratic rule. In Mozambique and Angola, we have
played a leading role in bringing an end to two decades of
civil war and promoting national reconciliation. Forthe
first time, there is the prospect that all of southern Africa
could enjoy the fruits of peace and prosperity. Throughout
the continent— in Rwanda, Burundi, Liberia, Sudan and
elsewhere — we work with the UN and regional organiza-
tions to encourage peaceful resolution of internal disputes.

In 1994, South Africa held its first non-racial elections and
created a Government of National Unity. Local govern-
ment elections throughout most of the country in
November 1995 marked the near-end of the process of
political transformation. The adoption of a final constitu-
tion now remains.

Vice President Gore recently completed his second trip to
the African continent and to South Africa, where he
conducted the first formal meeting of the U.S.-South Africa
Binational Commission formed during the October 1994
state visit of President Mandela. We remain committed to
addressing the socio-economic legacies of apartheid, and
we view U.S. support for economic advancement and
democratization in South Africa as mutually reinforcing.

It is notjust in South Africa that we are witnessing democ-
ratization. ln quieter but no less dramatic ways in countries
like Benin, Congo, Malawi, Mali, Namibia and Zambia,
we are seeing democratic revolutions in need of our
support. We want to encourage the creation of cultures of
tolerance, flowering of civil society and the protection of
human right and dignity.

Our humanitarian interventions, along with the interna-
tional community, will address the grave circumstances in
several nations on the continent. USAlD's new "Greater
Horn of Africa" Initiative is building a foundation forfood
security and crisis prevention in the Greater Horn of Africa.
This initiative has now moved beyond relief to support
reconstruction and sustainable development. In Somalia,
our forces broke through the chaos that prevented the
introduction of relief supplies. U.S. forces prevented the

44

death of hundreds of thousands of Somalis and then turned
over the mission to UN peacekeepers from over a score of
nations. In Rwanda, Sudan, Angola, Sierra Leone and
Liberia, we have taken an active role in providing humani-
tarian relief to those displaced by violence.

Such efforts by the United States and the international
community must be limited in duration and designed to
give the peoples of a nation the opportunity to put their
own house in order. In the final analysis, the responsibility
for the fate of a nation rests with its own people.

We are also working with international financial institu-
tions, regional organizations, private volunteer and
nongovernmental organizations and governments
throughout Africa to address the urgent issues of popula-
tion growth, spreading disease (including AIDS), environ-
mental decline, enhancing the role of women in develop-
ment, eliminating supportforterrorism, demobilization of
bloated militaries, relieving burdensome debt and
expanding trade and investment ties to the countries of
Africa. The United States is working closely with other
donors to implement wide ranging management and
policy reforms at the African Development Bank (AfDB).
The AfDB plays a key role in promoting sustainable devel-
opment and poverty alleviation.

Central to all these efforts will be strengthening the
American constituency for Africa, drawing on the knowl-
edge, experience and commitment of millions of
Americans to enhance our nation's support for positive
political, economic and social change in Africa. For
example, the 1994 White House Conference on Africa, the
first such gathering of regional expert ever sponsored by
the White House, drew together more than 200 Americans
from the Administration, Congress, business, labor, acad-
emia, religious groups, relief and development agencies,
human rights groups and others to discuss Africa's future
and the role that the United States can play in it. The
President, Vice President, Secretary of State and National
Security Advisor all participated in the conference, which
produced a wealth of new ideas and new commitment to
Africa.

