 

A NATIONAL
SECU RITY

ST :%A"EGY
FOR A

NEW CEN U RY

THE WHITE HOUSE
OCTOBER 1998

Contents

Preface  iii
I. Introduction... 1
Challenges and Opportunities... 1
The Imperative of Engagement... 1
Implementing the Strategy... 2
ll. Advancing U.S. National Interests... 5
Enhancing Security at Home and Abroad... 6
Threats to U.S. Interests... 6
The Need for Integrated Approaches... 7
Shaping the International Environment... 8
Diplomacy... 8
International Assistance... 8
Arms Control... 9
Nonproliferation Initiatives... 11
Military Activities... 12

International Law Enforcement
Cooperation... 13

Environmental Initiatives... 13
Responding to Threats and Crises... 14

Transnational Threats... 15

Terrorism... 15

International Crime... 16

Drug Trafficking... 17
Emerging Threats at Home  19

Managing the Consequences of
WMD Incidents  19

Protecting Critical
Infrastructures... 21

Smaller—Scale Contingencies... 21

Major Theater Warfare... 22

Preparing Now for an Uncertain
Future... 23

Overarching Capabilities... 24

Quality People... 24

Intelligence, Surveillance and
Reconnaissance... 24

Space... 25
Missile Defense... 26

National Security Emergency
Preparedness... 26

Overseas Presence and Power
Projection... 26

Promoting Prosperity... 27

Strengthening Macroeconomic
Coordination... 27

Enhancing American Competitiveness... 29

Enhancing Access to Foreign
Markets... 29

Promoting an Open Trading
System... 29

Export Strategy and Advocacy
Program... 31

Enhanced Export Control... 31
Providing for Energy Security... 32

Promoting Sustainable Development
Abroad... 33

Promoting Democracy... 33
Emerging Democracies... 33

Adherence to Universal Human Rights and
Democratic Principles... 34

Humanitarian Activities... 35
Ill. Integrated Regional Approaches... 36
Europe and Eurasia... 36
East Asia and the Pacific... 41
The Western Hemisphere... 48

The Middle East, Southwest and
South Asia... 51

Africa... 54

IV. Conclusions... 59

Preface

As we approach the beginning of the 21“ century, the
United States remains the world’s most powerful
force for peace, prosperity and the universal values
of democracy and freedom. Our nation’s challenge-
and our responsibility—is to sustain that role by
harnessing the forces of global integration for the
benefit of our own people and people around the
world.

These forces of integration offer us an unprece-
dented opportunity to build new bonds among
individuals and nations, to tap the world’s vast human
potential in support of shared aspirations, and to
create a brighter future for our children. But they also
present new, complex challenges. The same forces
that bring us closer increase our interdependence,
and make us more vulnerable to forces like extreme
nationalism, terrorism, crime, environmental damage
and the complex flows of trade and investment that
know no borders.

To seize these opportunities, and move against the
threats of this new global era, we are pursuing a
forward—looking national security strategy attuned to
the realities of our new era. This report, submitted in
accordance with Section 603 of the Goldwater-
Nichols Defense Department Reorganization Act of
1986, sets forth that strategy. Its three core
objectives are:

- To enhance our security.
- To bolster America’s economic prosperity.
- To promote democracy abroad.

Over the past five years, we have been putting this
strategy in place through a network of institutions and
arrangements with distinct missions, but a common
purpose—to secure and strengthen the gains of
democracy and free markets while turning back their
enemies. Through this web of institutions and
arrangements, the United States and its partners in

the international community are laying a foundation
for security and prosperity in the 21st century.

This strategy encompasses a wide range of
initiatives: expanded military alliances like NATO, its
Partnership for Peace, and its partnerships with
Russia and Ukraine; promoting free trade through the
World Trade Organization and the move toward free
trade areas by nations in the Americas and
elsewhere around the world; strong arms control
regimes like the Chemical Weapons Convention and
the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty;
multinational coalitions combating terrorism,
corruption, crime and drug trafficking; and binding
international commitments to protect the environment
and safeguard human rights.

The United States must have the tools necessary to
carry out this strategy. We have worked diligently
within the parameters of the Balanced Budget
Agreement to preserve and provide for the readiness
of our armed forces while meeting priority military
challenges identified in the 1997 Quadrennial
Defense Review (QDR). The QDR struck a careful
balance between near—term readiness, long-term
modernization and quality of life improvements for
our men and women in uniform. It ensured that the
high readiness levels of our forward—deployed and
"first—to-fight" forces would be maintained. The
priority we attach to maintaining a high-quality force
is reflected in our budget actions. This fiscal year,
with Congress’ support for the Bosnia and Southwest
Asia non—offset emergency supplemental funds, we
were able to protect our high payoff readiness
accounts. Next year's Defense Budget increases
funding for readiness and preserves quality of life for
military personnel.

Although we have accomplished much on the
readiness front, much more needs to be done. Our
military leadership and I are constantly reevaluating
the readiness of our forces and addressing problems
in individual readiness areas as they arise. I have

instructed the Office of Management and Budget and
the National Security Council to work with the
Department of Defense to formulate a multi—year plan
with the necessary resources to preserve military
readiness, support our troops, and modernize the
equipment needed for the next century. I am
confident that our military is—and will continue to
be—capable of carrying out our national strategy and
meeting America's defense commitments around the
world.

We must also renew our commitment to America’s
diplomacy—to ensure that we have the superb
diplomatic representation that our people deserve and
our interests demand. Every dollar we devote to
preventing conflicts, promoting democracy, and
stopping the spread of disease and starvation brings a
sure return in security and savings. Yet international
affairs spending today totals just one percent of the
federal budget—a small fraction of what America
invested at the start of the Cold War when we chose
engagement over isolation. If America is to continue
to lead the world by its own example, we must
demonstrate our own commitment to these priority
tasks. This is also why we must pay our dues to the
United Nations.

Protecting our citizens and critical infrastructures at
home is an essential element of our strategy.
Potential adversaries—whether nations, terrorist
groups or criminal organizations—will be tempted to
disrupt our critical infrastructures, impede
government operations, use weapons of mass
destruction against civilians, and prey on our citizens
overseas. These challenges demand close
cooperation across all levels of government—federal,
state and local—and across a wide range of
agencies, including the Departments of Defense and
State, the Intelligence Community, law enforcement,
emergency services, medical care providers and
others. Protecting our critical infrastructure requires
new partnerships between government and industry.
Forging these new structures will be challenging, but

must be done if we are to ensure our safety at home
and avoid vulnerabilities that those wishing us ill
might try to exploit in order to erode our resolve to
protect our interests abroad.

The United States has profound interests at stake in
the health of the global economy. Our future
prosperity depends upon a stable international
financial system and robust global growth. Economic
stability and growth are essential for the spread of
free markets and their integration into the global
economy. The forces necessary for a healthy global
economy are also those that deepen democratic
liberties: the free flow of ideas and information, open
borders and easy travel, the rule of law, fair and
even—handed enforcement, protection for consumers,
a skilled and educated work force. If citizens tire of
waiting for democracy and free markets to deliver a
better life for them, there is a real risk that they will
lose confidence in democracy and free markets. This
would pose great risks not only for our economic
interests but for our national security.

We are taking a number of steps to help contain the
current financial turmoil in Asia and other parts of the
world. We are working with other industrialized
nations, the International Monetary Fund and the
World Bank to spur growth, stop the financial crisis
from spreading, and help the victims of financial
turmoil. We have also intensified our efforts to reform
international trade and financial institutions: building a
stronger and more accountable global trading
system, pressing forward with market-opening
initiatives, advancing the protection of labor and the
environment and doing more to ensure that trade
helps the lives of ordinary citizens across the globe.

At this moment in history, the United States is called
upon to lead—to organize the forces of freedom and
progress; to channel the unruly energies of the global
economy into positive avenues; and to advance our
prosperity, reinforce our democratic ideals and
values, and enhance our security.

I. Introduction

We must judge our national security strategy by its
success in meeting the fundamental purposes set out
in the preamble to the Constitution:

...provide for the common defence, promote the
general Welfare, and secure the Blessings of
Liberty to ourselves and our Posterity,...

Since the founding of the nation, certain requirements
have remained constant. We must protect the lives
and personal safety of Americans, both at home and
abroad. We must maintain the sovereignty, political
freedom and independence of the United States, with
its values, institutions and territory intact. And, we
must promote for the well being and prosperity of the
nation and its people.

Challenges and Opportunities

The security environment in which we live is dynamic
and uncertain, replete with a host of threats and
challenges that have the potential to grow more
deadly, but also offering unprecedented opportunities
to avert those threats and advance our interests.

Globalization—the process of accelerating economic,
technological, cultural and political integration-
means that more and more we as a nation are
affected by events beyond our borders. Outlaw
states and ethnic conflicts threaten regional stability
and economic progress in many important areas of
the world. Weapons of mass destruction (WMD),
terrorism, drug trafficking and organized crime are
global concerns that transcend national borders.
Other problems that once seemed quite distant-
such as resource depletion, rapid population growth,
environmental damage, new infectious diseases and
uncontrolled refugee migration—have important
implications for American security. Our workers and
businesses will suffer if foreign markets collapse or
look us out, and the highest domestic environmental
standards will not protect us if we cannot get others
to achieve similar standards. In short, our citizens

have a direct stake in the prosperity and stability of
other nations, in their support for international norms
and human rights, in their ability to combat interna-
tional crime, in their open markets, and in their efforts
to protect the environment.

Yet, this is also a period of great promise. Globaliza-
tion is bringing citizens from all continents closer
together, allowing them to share ideas, goods and
information at the tap of a keyboard. Many nations
around the world have embraced America’s core
values of representative governance, free market
economics and respect for fundamental human rights
and the rule of law, creating new opportunities to
promote peace, prosperity and greater cooperation
among nations. Former adversaries now cooperate
with us. The dynamism of the global economy is
transforming commerce, culture, communications
and global relations, creating new jobs and economic
opportunity for millions of Americans.

The Imperative of Engagement

Our strategic approach recognizes that we must lead
abroad if we are to be secure at home, but we cannot
lead abroad unless we are strong at home. We must
be prepared and willing to use all appropriate
instruments of national power to influence the actions
of other states and non—state actors. Today's
complex security environment demands that all our
instruments of national power be effectively
integrated to achieve our security objectives. We
must have the demonstrated will and capabilities to
continue to exert global leadership and remain the
preferred security partner for the community of states
that share our interests. We have seen in the past
that the international community is often reluctant to
act forcefully without American leadership. In many
instances, the United States is the only nation
capable of providing the necessary leadership and
capabilities for an international response to shared
challenges. American leadership and engagement

in the world are vital for our security, and our nation
and the world are safer and more prosperous as a
result.

The alternative to engagement is not withdrawal from
the world; it is passive submission to powerful forces
of change—all the more ironic at a time when our
capacity to shape them is as great as it has ever
been. Three—quarters of a century ago, the United
States helped to squander Allied victory in World War
I by embracing isolationism. After World War II, and
in the face of a new totalitarian threat, America
accepted the challenge to lead. We remained
engaged overseas and worked with our allies to
create international structures—from the Marshall
Plan, the United Nations, NATO and other defense
arrangements, to the International Monetary Fund
and the World Bank—that enabled us to strengthen
our security and prosperity and win the Cold War. By
exerting our leadership abroad we have deterred
aggression, fostered the resolution of conflicts,
strengthened democracies, opened foreign markets
and tackled global problems such as protecting the
environment. U.S. leadership has been crucial to the
success of negotiations that produced a wide range
of treaties that have made the world safer and more
secure by limiting, reducing, preventing the spread of,
or eliminating weapons of mass destruction and other
dangerous weapons. Without our leadership and
engagement, threats would multiply and our
opportunities would narrow.

Underpinning our international leadership is the
power of our democratic ideals and values. In
designing our strategy, we recognize that the spread
of democracy supports American values and
enhances both our security and prosperity.
Democratic governments are more likely to cooperate
with each other against common threats, encourage
free trade, and promote sustainable economic
development. They are less likely to wage war or
abuse the rights of their people. Hence, the trend
toward democracy and free markets throughout the
world advances American interests. The United
States will support this trend by remaining actively
engaged in the world. This is the strategy to take us
into the next century.

Implementing the Strategy

Our global leadership efforts will continue to be
guided by President Clinton's strategic priorities: to

foster regional efforts led by the community of
democratic nations to promote peace and prosperity
in key regions of the world, to increase cooperation in
confronting new security threats that defy borders
and unilateral solutions, to strengthen the military,
diplomatic and law enforcement tools necessary to
meet these challenges and to create more jobs and
opportunities for Americans through a more open and
competitive economic system that also benefits
others around the world. Our strategy is tempered by
recognition that there are limits to America’s
involvement in the world. We must be selective in
the use of our capabilities and the choices we make
always must be guided by advancing our objectives
of a more secure, prosperous and free America.

We must always be prepared to act alone when that
is our most advantageous course. But many of our
security objectives are best achieved—or can only be
achieved—through our alliances and other formal
security structures, or as a leader of an ad hoc
coalition formed around a specific objective. Durable
relationships with allies and friendly nations are vital
to our security. A central thrust of our strategy is to
strengthen and adapt the security relationships we
have with key nations around the world and create
new relationships and structures when necessary.
Examples include NATO enlargement, the
Partnership for Peace, the NATO—Russia Permanent
Joint Council, the African Crisis Response Initiative,
the regional security dialogue in the ASEAN Regional
Forum and the hemispheric security initiatives
adopted at the Summit of the Americas. At other
times we harness our diplomatic, economic, military
and information strengths to shape a favorable
international environment outside of formal
structures. This approach has borne fruit in areas as
diverse as the elimination of nuclear weapons from
Ukraine, Kazakhstan and Belarus, our
comprehensive assistance package for Russia and
other Newly Independent States (NIS), the
advancement of peace in Northern Ireland, and
support for the transformation of South Africa.

Protecting our citizens and critical infrastructures at
home is an intrinsic and essential element of our
security strategy. The dividing line between domestic
and foreign policy is increasingly blurred. Globaliza-
tion enables other states, terrorists, criminals, drug
traffickers and others to challenge the safety of our
citizens and the security of our borders in new ways.
The security challenges wrought by globalization
demand close cooperation across all levels of

government—federal, state and local—and across a
wide range of agencies, including the Departments of
Defense and State, the Intelligence Community, law
enforcement, emergency services, medical care
providers and others. Protecting our critical infra-
structure requires new partnerships between govern-
ment and industry. Forging these new structures and
relationships will be challenging, but must be done if
we are to ensure our safety at home and avoid
vulnerabilities that those wishing us ill might try to
exploit in order to erode our resolve to protect our
interests abroad.

Engagement abroad rightly depends on the willing-
ness of the American people and the Congress to
bear the costs of defending U.S. interests—in dollars,
energy and, when there is no alternative, the risk of
losing American lives. We must, therefore, foster the
broad public understanding and bipartisan
congressional support necessary to sustain our
international engagement, always recognizing that
some decisions that face popular opposition must
ultimately be judged by whether they advance the
interests of the American people in the long run.

ll. Advancing U.S. National Interests

The goal of the national security strategy is to ensure
the protection of our nation's fundamental and
enduring needs: protect the lives and safety of
Americans, maintain the sovereignty of the United
States with its values, institutions and territory intact,
and promote the prosperity and well—being of the
nation and its people. In our vision of the world, the
United States has close cooperative relations with the
world’s most influential countries and has the ability to
influence the policies and actions of those who can
affect our national well—being.

We seek to create a stable, peaceful international
security environment in which our nation, citizens and
interests are not threatened. The United States will
not allow a hostile power to dominate any region of
critical importance to our interests. We will work to
prevent the spread of nuclear, biological and
chemical weapons and the materials for producing
them, and to control other potentially destabilizing
technologies, such as long—range missiles. We will
continue to ensure that we have effective means for
countering and responding to the threats we cannot
deter or otherwise prevent from arising. This includes
protecting our citizens from terrorism, international
crime and drug trafficking.

We seek a world in which democratic values and
respect for human rights and the rule of law are
increasingly accepted. This will be achieved through
broadening the community of free-market
democracies, promoting an international community
that is willing and able to prevent or respond
effectively to humanitarian problems, and
strengthening international non-governmental
movements committed to human rights and
democratization. These efforts help prevent
humanitarian disasters, promote reconciliation in
states experiencing civil conflict and address migration
and refugee crises.

We seek continued American prosperity through
increasingly open international trade and sustainable
growth in the global economy. The health of the

international economy directly affects our security,
just as stability enhances the prospects for prosperity.
Prosperity ensures that we are able to sustain our
military forces, foreign initiatives and global influence.
In turn, our engagement and influence helps ensure
that the world remains stable so the international
economic system can flourish.

We seek a cleaner global environment to protect the
health and well—being of our citizens. A deteriorating
environment not only threatens public health, it
impedes economic growth and can generate tensions
that threaten international stability. To the extent that
other nations believe they must engage in non-
sustainable exploitation of natural resources, our
long-term prosperity and security are at risk.

Since there are always many demands for U.S.
action, our national interests must be clear. These
interests fall into three categories. The first includes
vital interests—those of broad, overriding impor-
tance to the survival, safety and vitality of our nation.
Among these are the physical security of our territory
and that of our allies, the safety of our citizens, our
economic well—being and the protection of our critical
infrastructures. We will do what we must to defend
these interests, including—when necessary—using
our military might unilaterally and decisively.

The second category includes situations in which
important national interests are at stake. These
interests do not affect our national survival, but they
do affect our national well—being and the character of
the world in which we live. In such cases, we will use
our resources to advance these interests insofar as
the costs and risks are commensurate with the
interests at stake. Our efforts to halt the flow of
refugees from Haiti and restore democracy in that
state, our participation in NATO operations in Bosnia
and our efforts to protect the global environment are
relevant examples.

The third category is humanitarian and other
interests. In some circumstances our nation may act
because our values demand it. Examples include

responding to natural and manmade disasters or
violations of human rights, supporting democratiza-
tion and civil control of the military, assisting
humanitarian demining, and promoting sustainable
development. Often in such cases, the force of our
example bolsters support for our leadership in the
world. Whenever possible, we seek to avert
humanitarian disasters and conflict through diplomacy
and cooperation with a wide range of partners,
including other governments, international institutions
and non-governmental organizations. This may not
only save lives, but also prevent the drain on
resources caused by intervention in crises.

Our strategy is based on three national objectives:
enhancing our security, bolstering our economic
prosperity and promoting democracy abroad.

Enhancing Security at
Home and Abroad

Our strategy for enhancing U.S. security recognizes
that we face diverse threats requiring integrated
approaches to defend the nation, shape the
international environment, respond to crises and
prepare for an uncertain future.

Threats to U.S. Interests

The current international security environment
presents a diverse set of threats to our enduring
goals and hence to our security:

- Regional or State-Centered Threats: A number
of states still have the capabilities and the desire
to threaten our vital interests through coercion or
aggression. They continue to threaten the
sovereignty of their neighbors and international
access to resources. In many cases, these
states are also actively improving their offensive
capabilities, including efforts to obtain or retain
nuclear, biological or chemical weapons and, in
some cases, long—range delivery systems. In
Southwest Asia, both Iraq and Iran have the
potential to threaten their neighbors and the free
flow of oil from the region. In East Asia, North
Korea maintains its forward positioning of
offensive military capabilities on its border with
South Korea.

Transnational threats: Terrorism, international
crime, drug trafficking, illicit arms trafficking,
uncontrolled refugee migrations and
environmental damage threaten U.S. interests,
citizens and the U.S. homeland itself. The
possibility of terrorists and other criminals using
WMD—nuclear, biological and chemical
weapons—is of special concern. Threats to the
national information infrastructure, ranging from
cyber—crime to a strategic information attack on
the United States via the global information
network, present a dangerous new threat to our
national security. We must also guard against
threats to our other critical national
infrastructures—such as electrical power and
transportation—which increasingly could take the
form of a cyber-attack in addition to physical
attack or sabotage, and could originate from
terrorist or criminal groups as well as hostile
states. International drug trafficking organizations
have become the most powerful and dangerous
organized crime groups the United States has
ever confronted due to their sophisticated
production, shipment, distribution and financial
systems, and the violence and corruption they
promote everywhere they operate.

Spread of dangerous technologies: Weapons
of mass destruction pose the greatest potential
threat to global stability and security. Proliferation
of advanced weapons and technologies threatens
to provide rogue states, terrorists and
international crime organizations the means to
inflict terrible damage on the United States, its
allies and U.S. citizens and troops abroad. We
must continue to deter and be prepared to
counter the use or threatened use of WMD,
reduce the threat posed by existing arsenals of
such weaponry and halt the smuggling of nuclear
materials. We must identify the technical
information, technologies and materials that
cannot be allowed to fall into the hands of those
seeking to develop and produce WMD. And we
must stop the proliferation of

non—safeguarded dual-use technologies that
place these destructive capabilities in the hands
of parties hostile to U.S. and global security
interests.

Foreign intelligence collection: The threat
from foreign intelligence services is more diverse,
complex and difficult to counter than ever before.

This threat is a mix of traditional and non-
traditional intelligence adversaries that have
targeted American military, diplomatic,
technological and commercial secrets. Some
foreign intelligence services are rapidly adopting
new technologies and innovative methods to
obtain such secrets, including attempts to use the
global information infrastructure to gain access to
sensitive information via penetration of computer
systems and networks. These new methods
com pound the already serious threat posed by
traditional human, technical and signals
intelligence activities.

- Failed states: We can expect that, despite
international prevention efforts, some states will
be unable to provide basic governance, services
and opportunities for their populations, potentially
generating internal conflict, humanitarian crises
or regional instability. As governments lose their
ability to provide for the welfare of their citizens,
mass migration, civil unrest, famine, mass
killings, environmental disasters and aggression
against neighboring states or ethnic groups can
threaten U.S. interests and citizens.

The Need for Integrated
Approaches

Success in countering these varied threats requires
an integrated approach that brings to bear all the
capabilities and assets needed to achieve our
security objectives—particularly in this era when
domestic and foreign policies are increasingly blurred.

To effectively shape the international environment
and respond to the full spectrum of potential threats
and crises, diplomacy, military force, our other foreign
policy tools and our domestic preparedness efforts
must be closely coordinated. We must retain a
strong foreign assistance program and an effective
diplomatic corps if we are to maintain American
leadership. We must maintain superior military forces
at the level of readiness necessary to effectively deter
aggression, conduct a wide range of peacetime
activities and smaller—scale contingencies, and,
preferably in concert with regional friends and allies,
win two overlapping major theater wars. The success
of all our foreign policy tools is critically dependent on
timely and effective intelligence collection and
analysis capabilities.

International cooperation will be vital for building
security in the next century because many of the
threats we face cannot be addressed by a single
nation. Globalization of transportation and
communications has allowed international terrorists
and criminals to operate without geographic
constraints, while individual governments and their
law enforcement agencies remain limited by national
boundaries. Unlike terrorists and criminals, govern-
ments must respect the sovereignty of other nations.
Accordingly, a central thrust of our strategy is to
enhance relationships with key nations around the
world to combat transnational threats to common
interests. We seek to address these threats by
increasing intelligence and law enforcement coopera-
tion, denying terrorists safe havens, preventing arms
traders from fueling regional conflicts and subverting
international embargoes, and cracking down on drug
trafficking, money laundering and international crime.

Building effective coalitions of like—minded nations is
not enough. We are continuing to strengthen and
integrate our own diplomatic, military, intelligence and
law enforcement capabilities so we can act on our
own when we must as well as more effectively lead
the international community in responding to these
threats.

Potential enemies, whether nations, terrorist groups
or criminal organizations, are increasingly likely to
attack U.S. territory and the American people in
unconventional ways. Adversaries will be tempted to
disrupt our critical infrastructures, impede continuity
of government operations, use weapons of mass
destruction against civilians in our cities, attack us
when we gather at special events and prey on our
citizens overseas. The United States must act to
deter or prevent such attacks and, if attacks occurs
despite those efforts, must be prepared to limit the
damage they cause and respond decisively against
the perpetrators. We will spare no effort to bring
attackers to justice, ever adhering to our policy toward
terrorists that "You can run, but you cannot hide," and
where appropriate to defend ourselves by striking at
terrorist bases and states that support terrorist acts.

At home, we must have effective capabilities for
thwarting and responding to terrorist acts, countering
international crime and foreign intelligence collection,
and protecting critical national infrastructures. Our
efforts to counter these threats cannot be limited
exclusively to any one agency within the U.S.

Government. The threats and their consequences
cross agency lines, requiring close cooperation
among Federal agencies, state and local govern-
ments, the industries that own and operate critical
national infrastructures, non—governmental
organizations and others in the private sector.

Shaping the International
Environment

The United States has a range of tools at its disposal
with which to shape the international environment in
ways favorable to U.S. interests and global security.
Shaping activities enhance U.S. security by promoting
regional security and preventing or reducing the wide
range of diverse threats outlined above. These
measures adapt and strengthen alliances and
friendships, maintain U.S. influence in key regions
and encourage adherence to international norms.
When signs of potential conflict emerge, or potential
threats appear, we undertake initiatives to prevent or
reduce these threats. Our shaping efforts also aim to
discourage arms races, halt the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, reduce tensions in
critical regions and combat the spread of international
criminal organizations.

Many of our international shaping activities, often
undertaken with the cooperation of our allies and
friends, also help to prevent threats from arising that
place at risk American lives and property at home.
Examples include countering terrorism, drug and
firearms trafficking, illegal immigration, the spread of
WMD and other threats. Increasingly, shaping the
security environment involves a wide range of Federal
agencies, some of which in the past have not been
thought of as having such an international role.

Diplomacy

Diplomacy is a vital tool for countering threats to our
national security. The daily business of diplomacy
conducted through our missions and representatives
around the world is a irreplaceable shaping activity.
These efforts are essential to sustaining our alliances,
forcefully articulating U.S. interests, resolving regional
disputes peacefully, averting humanitarian
catastrophe, deterring aggression against the United
States and our friends and allies, creating trade and

investment opportunities for U.S. companies, and
projecting U.S. influence worldwide.

One of the lessons that has been repeatedly driven
home is the importance of preventive diplomacy in
dealing with conflict and complex emergencies.
Helping prevent nations from failing is far more
effective than rebuilding them after an internal crisis.
Helping people stay in their homes is far more
beneficial than feeding and housing them in refugee
camps. Helping relief agencies and international
organizations strengthen the institutions of conflict
resolution is far less taxing than healing ethnic and
social divisions that have already exploded into
bloodshed. In short, while crisis management and
crisis resolution are necessary tasks for our foreign
policy, preventive diplomacy is obviously far
preferable.

Credible military force and the demonstrated will to
use it are essential to defend our vital interests and
keep America safe. But force alone cannot solve all
our problems. To be most effective, force, diplomacy
and our other policy tools must complement and
reinforce each other—for there will be many
occasions and many places where we must rely on
diplomatic shaping activities to protect and advance
our interests.

International Assistance

From the U.S.-led mobilization to rebuild post—war
Europe to the more recent creation of export
opportunities across Asia, Latin America and Africa,
U.S. foreign assistance has assisted emerging
democracies, helped expand free markets, slowed
the growth of international crime, contained major
health threats, improved protection of the
environment and natural resources, slowed
population growth and defused humanitarian crises.
Crises are averted—and U.S. preventive diplomacy
actively reinforced—through U.S. sustainable
development programs that promote voluntary family
planning, basic education, environmental protection,
democratic governance and rule of law, and the
economic empowerment of private citizens.

When combined effectively with other bilateral and
multilateral activities, such as through our cooperative
scientific and technological programs, U.S. initiatives
reduce the need for costly military and humanitarian
interventions. Where foreign aid succeeds in

consolidating free market policies, substantial growth
of American exports has frequently followed. Where
crises have occurred, actions such as the Greater
Horn of Africa Initiative have helped stanch mass
human suffering and created a path out of conflict
and dislocation through targeted relief. Other foreign
aid programs have worked to help restore elementary
security and civic institutions.

Arms Control

Arms control efforts are an essential element of our
national security strategy. Effective arms control is
really defense by other means. We pursue verifiable
arms control agreements that support our efforts to
prevent the spread and use of weapons of mass
destruction, halt the use of conventional weapons that
cause unnecessary suffering, and contribute to
regional stability at lower levels of armaments. By
increasing transparency in the size, structure and
operations of military forces, arms control
agreements and confidence—building measures
reduce incentives and opportunities to initiate an
attack, and reduce the mutual suspicions that arise
from and spur on armaments competition. They help
provide the assurance of security necessary to
strengthen cooperative relationships and direct
resources to safer, more productive endeavors.
Agreements that preserve our crisis response
capability shape the global and regional security
environments, and simultaneously reinforce our
commitment to allies and partners. Our arms control
initiatives are an essential prevention measure for
enhancing U.S. and allied security.

verifiable reductions in strategic offensive arms and
the steady shift toward less destabilizing systems
remain essential to our strategy. Entry into force of
the START I Treaty in December 1994 charted the
course for reductions in the deployed strategic
nuclear forces of the United States and the Former
Soviet Union (FSU). START I has accomplished
much to reduce the risk of nuclear war and strength-
en international security. On the third anniversary of
START I entry into force, the United States and
Russia announced that both were two years ahead of
schedule in meeting the treaty’s mandated
reductions.

Once the START II Treaty enters into force, the
United States and Russia will each be limited to
between 3,000—3,500 total deployed strategic nuclear

warheads. START II also will eliminate destabilizing
land-based multiple warhead missiles, a truly historic
achievement. Russian ratification of START II will
open the door to the next round of strategic arms
control.

At the Helsinki Summit in March 1997, Presidents
Clinton and Yeltsin agreed that once START II enters
into force, our two nations would immediately begin
negotiations on a START III agreement. They agreed
to START III guidelines that, if adopted, will cap the
number of strategic nuclear warheads deployed in
each country at 2,000—2,500 by the end of 2007—
reducing both our arsenals by 80 percent from Cold
War heights. They also agreed that START III will,
for the first time, require the U.S. and Russia to
destroy nuclear warheads, not just the missiles,
aircraft and submarines that carry them, and opened
the door to possible reductions in non—strategic
nuclear weapons. On September 26, 1997, the U.S.
and Russia signed a START II Protocol codifying the
agreement at Helsinki to extend the end date for
reductions to 2007 and exchanged letters on early
deactivation by 2003 of those strategic nuclear
delivery systems to be eliminated by 2007.

At Helsinki, the two Presidents recognized the Nunn—
Lugar Cooperative Threat Reduction (CTR) Program
as the vehicle through which the United States would
facilitate the deactivation of strategic nuclear delivery
systems in the FSU nations. The CTR Program has
assisted Ukraine, Kazakhstan and Belarus in
becoming non-nuclear weapons states and will
continue to assist Russia in meeting its START
obligations. The program has effectively supported
enhanced safety, security, accounting and centralized
control measures for nuclear weapons and fissile
materials in the FSU. CTR is also assisting FSU
nations in measures to eliminate and prevent the
proliferation of chemical weapons and biological
weapon—related capabilities. It has supported many
ongoing military reductions and reform measures in
the FSU, and has contributed to a climate conducive
for further progress on non-proliferation.

Also at Helsinki, the Presidents reaffirmed their
commitment to the Anti-Ballistic Missile (ABM) Treaty
and recognized the need for effective theater missile
defenses in an agreement in principle on demarcation
between systems to counter strategic ballistic
missiles and those to counter theater ballistic
missiles. On September 26, 1997, the U.S. Secretary
of State and Russian Foreign Minister, along with

their counterparts from Belarus, Kazakhstan and
Ukraine, signed or initialed five agreements relating to
the ABM Treaty. The agreements on demarcation
and succession will be provided to the Senate for its
advice and consent following Russian ratification of
START II.

By banning all nuclear test explosions for all time, the
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) constrains
the development of dangerous nuclear weapons,
contributes to preventing nuclear proliferation and to
the process of nuclear disarmament, and enhances
the ability of the United States to monitor suspicious
nuclear activities in other countries through a
worldwide sensor network and on—site inspections.
Nuclear tests in India and Pakistan in May 1998 make
it more important than ever to move quicklyto bring
the CTBT into force and continue establishment of
the substantial verification mechanisms called for in
the treaty. The President has submitted the treaty,
which 150 nations have signed, to the Senate and
has urged the Senate to provide its advice and
consent this year. Prompt U.S. ratification will
encourage other states to ratify, enable the United
States to lead the international effort to gain CTBT
entry into force and strengthen international norms
against nuclear testing. Multilateral and regional
arms control efforts also increase U.S. and global
security. We seek to strengthen the Biological
Weapons Convention (BWC) with a new international
regime to ensure compliance. At present, we are
negotiating with other BWC member states in an
effort to reach consensus on a protocol to the BWC
that would implement an inspection system to deter
and detect cheating. We are also working hard to
implement and enforce the Chemical Weapons
Convention (CWC). The United States Senate
underscored the importance of these efforts with its
April 24, 1997 decision, by a vote of 74-26, to give its
advice and consent to ratification of the CWC. The
next key step is legislation to implement full
compliance with the commercial declarations and
inspections that are required by the CWC.

In Europe, we are pursuing the adaptation of the 1990
Conventional Armed Forces in Europe (CFE) Treaty,
consistent with the Decision on Certain Basic
Elements adopted in Vienna on July 23, 1997 by all
30 CFE states. Success in this negotiation will
ensure that this landmark agreement remains a
cornerstone of European security into the 21“ century
and beyond. We continue to seek Russian, Ukrainian
and Belarusian ratification of the 1992 Open Skies

10

Treaty to increase transparency of military forces in
Eurasia and North America. We also promote,
through international organizations such as the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), implementation of confidence and security-
building measures, including the 1994 Vienna
Document, throughout Europe and in specific regions
of tension and instability—even where we are not
formal parties to such agreements. The agreements
mandated by the Dayton Accords demonstrate how
innovative regional efforts can strengthen stability and
reduce conflicts that could adversely affect U.S.
interests abroad.

President Clinton is committed to ending the tragic
damage to innocent civilians due to anti—personnel
landmines (APLs). The United States has already
taken major steps in the spirit that motivated the
Ottawa Convention, while ensuring our ability to meet
international obligations and provide for the safety
and security of our men and women in uniform. On
June 30, 1998, we met—one year ahead of
schedule—the President's May 1996 commitment to
destroy all of our non-self-destructing APLs by 1999,
except those we need for Korea and demining
training. To expand and strengthen the
Administration policy on APLs that he announced on
September 17, 1997, President Clinton signed
Presidential Decision Directive 64 in June 1998. It
directs the Defense Department to end the use of all
APLs, even of self—destructing APLs, outside Korea
by 2003 and to pursue aggressively the objective of
having APL alternatives ready for Korea by 2006. We
will also aggressively pursue alternatives to our mixed
anti—tank systems that contain anti—personnel
submunitions. We have made clear that the United
States will sign the Ottawa Convention by 2006 if we
succeed in identifying and fielding suitable
alternatives to our self—destructing APLs and mixed
anti—tank systems by then. Furthermore, in 1997 the
Administration submitted for Senate advice and
consent the Amended Landmine Protocol to the
Convention on Conventional Weapons, which bans
the unmarked, long-duration APLs that caused the
worldwide humanitarian problem. We have
established a permanent ban on APL exports and are
seeking to universalize an export ban through the
Conference on Disarmament in Geneva. In 1998 we
are spending $80 million on humanitarian demining
programs, more than double that of the previous year,
and through our "Demining 2010" initiative have
challenged the world to increase the effectiveness

and efficiency of removing landmines that threaten
civilians.

Nonproliferation Initiatives

Nonproliferation initiatives enhance global security by
preventing the spread of WMD, materials for
producing them and means of delivering them. That
is why the Administration is promoting universal
adherence to the international treaty regimes that
prohibit the acquisition of weapons of mass
destruction, including the Nuclear Non—Proliferation
Treaty (NPT), the CWC and the BWC. The NPT was
an indispensable precondition for the denuclearization
of Ukraine, Kazakhstan, Belarus and South Africa.
We also seek to strengthen the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) safeguards system and
achieve a Fissile Material Cutoff Treaty to cap the
nuclear materials available for weapons. A
coordinated effort by the intelligence community and
law enforcement agencies to detect, prevent and
deter illegal trafficking in fissile materials is also
essential to our counter—proliferation efforts.

The Administration also seeks to prevent destabiliz-
ing buildups of conventional arms and limit access to
sensitive technical information, equipment and
technologies by strengthening multilateral regimes,
including the Wassenaar Arrangement on Export
Controls for Conventional Arms and Dual—Use Goods
and Technologies, the Australia Group (for chemical
and biological weapons), the Missile Technology
Control Regime (MTCR) and the Nuclear Suppliers
Group. We are working to harmonize national export
control policies, increase information sharing, refine
control lists and expand cooperation against illicit
transfers.

Regional nonproliferation efforts are particularly
important in three critical proliferation zones. On the
Korean Peninsula, we are implementing the 1994
Agreed Framework, which requires full compliance by
North Korea with nonproliferation obligations. In the
Middle East and Southwest Asia, we encourage
regional arms control agreements that address the
legitimate security concerns of all parties and
continue efforts to thwart and roll back Iran’s
development of weapons of mass destruction and
Iraq’s efforts to reconstitute its programs. In South
Asia, we seek to persuade India and Pakistan to bring
their nuclear and missile programs into conformity
with international nonproliferation standards and to
sign and ratify the CTBT.

Through programs such as the Nunn—Lugar
Cooperative Threat Reduction Program and other
initiatives, we aim to strengthen controls over
weapons-usable fissile material and prevent the theft
or diversion of WMD and related material and
technology. We are working to strengthen the
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear
Material to increase accountability and protection,
which complements our effort to enhance IAEA
safeguards. We are purchasing tons of highly
enriched uranium from dismantled Russian nuclear
weapons for conversion into commercial reactor fuel,
and working with Russia to redirect former Soviet
facilities and scientists from military to peaceful
purposes.

To expand and improve U.S. efforts aimed at
deterring proliferation of WMD by organized crime
groups and individuals in the NIS and Eastern
Europe, the Defense Department and FBI are

11

implementing a joint counter proliferation assistance
program that provides appropriate training, material
and services to law enforcement agencies in these
areas. The program’s objectives are to assist in
establishing a professional cadre of law enforcement
personnel in these nations trained to prevent, deter
and investigate crimes related to the proliferation and
diversion of WMD or their delivery systems; to assist
these countries in developing laws and regulations
designed to prevent the illicit acquisition or trafficking
of WMD, and in establishing appropriate enforcement
mechanisms; and to build a solid legal and
organization framework that will enable these
governments to attack the proliferation problem at
home and participate effectively in international
efforts.

Military Activities

The U.S. military plays an essential role in building
coalitions and shaping the international environment
in ways that protect and promote U.S. interests.
Through overseas presence and peacetime
engagement activities such as defense cooperation,
security assistance, and training and exercises with
allies and friends, our armed forces help to deter
aggression and coercion, promote regional stability,
prevent and reduce conflicts and threats, and serve
as role models for militaries in emerging
democracies. These important efforts engage every
component of the Total Force: Active, Reserve,
National Guard and civilian.

Deterrence of aggression and coercion on a daily
basis is crucial. Our ability to deter potential
adversaries in peacetime rests on several factors,
particularly on our demonstrated will and ability to
uphold our security commitments when they are
challenged. We have earned this reputation through
both our declaratory policy, which clearly
communicates costs to potential adversaries, and our
credible warfighting capability. This capability is
embodied in ready forces and equipment strategically
stationed or deployed forward, in forces in the United
States at the appropriate level of readiness to deploy
and go into action when needed, in our ability to gain
timely access to critical regions and infrastructure
overseas, and in our demonstrated ability to form and
lead effective military coalitions.

Our nuclear deterrent posture is one of the most
visible and important examples of how U.S. military

12

capabilities can be used effectively to deter
aggression and coercion, as reaffirmed in a
Presidential Decision Directive signed by President
Clinton in November 1997. Nuclear weapons serve
as a hedge against an uncertain future, a guarantee
of our security commitments to allies and a
disincentive to those who would contemplate
developing or otherwise acquiring their own nuclear
weapons. Our military planning for the possible
employment of U.S. nuclear weapons is focused on
deterring a nuclear war rather than attempting to fight
and win a protracted nuclear exchange. We continue
to emphasize the survivability of the nuclear systems
and infrastructure necessary to endure a preemptive
attack and still respond at overwhelming levels. The
United States must continue to maintain a robust triad
of strategic forces sufficient to deter any hostile
foreign leadership with access to nuclear forces and
to convince it that seeking a nuclear advantage would
be futile. We must also ensure the continued viability
of the infrastructure that supports U.S. nuclear forces
and weapons. The Stockpile Stewardship Program
will guarantee the safety and reliability of our nuclear
weapons under the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty.

While our overall deterrence posture—nuclear and
conventional—has been effective against most
potential adversaries, a range of terrorist and criminal
organizations may not be deterred by traditional
deterrent threats. For these actors to be deterred,
they must believe that any type of attack against the
United States or its citizens will be attributed to them
and that we will respond effectively and decisively to
protect our national interests and ensure that justice
is done.

Our military promotes regional stability in numerous
ways. In Europe, East Asia and Southwest Asia,
where the U.S. has clear, vital interests, the American
military helps assure the security of our allies and
friends. The reinforcement of U.S. forces in the Gulf
from Fall 1997 to Spring 1998 clearly illustrates the
importance of military power in achieving U.S.
national security objectives and stabilizing a
potentially volatile situation. The U.S. buildup made it
clear to Saddam Hussein that he must comply with
UN sanctions and cease hindering UNSCOM
inspections or face dire consequences. It

also denied him the option of moving to threaten his
neighbors, as he had done in past confrontations with
the international community. Saddam’s agreement to
open the so-called "presidential sites" to UN
inspection was a significant step toward ensuring that
Iraq’s WMD have been eradicated. It would not have
been achieved without American diplomacy backed
by force. Our decision maintain a higher continuous
force level in the Gulf than we had before this most
recent confrontation with Iraq will help deter Saddam
from making further provocations and strengthen the
resolve of our coalition partners in the Gulf.

We are continuing to adapt and strengthen our
alliances and coalitions to meet the challenges of an
evolving security environment. U.S. military forces
prevent and reduce a wide range of potential conflicts
in key regions. An example of such an activity is our
deployment to the Former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia to help prevent the spread of violence to
that country. We assist other countries in improving
their pertinent military capabilities, including
peacekeeping and humanitarian response. With
countries that are neither staunch friends nor known
foes, military cooperation often serves as a positive
means of engagement, building security relationships
today that will contribute to improved relations
tomorrow.

Our armed forces also serve as a role model for
militaries in emerging democracies around the world.
Our 200—year history of strong civilian control of the
military serves as an example to those countries with
histories of non—democratic governments. Through
military—to—military activities and increasing links
between the U.S. military and the military
establishments of Partnership for Peace nations, for
instance, we are helping to transform military
institutions in Central and Eastern Europe, as well as
in the Newly Independent States of the former Soviet
Union.

International Law Enforcement
Cooperation

As threats to our national security from drug
trafficking, terrorism and international crime increase,
development of working relations U.S. and foreign
law enforcement and judicial agencies will play a vital
role in shaping law enforcement priorities in those
countries. Law enforcement agencies must continue

to find innovative ways to develop a concerted, global
attack on the spread of international crime.

Overseas law enforcement presence leverages
resources and fosters the establishment of effective
working relationships with foreign law enforcement
agencies. U.S. investigators and prosecutors draw
upon their experience and background to enlist the
cooperation of foreign law enforcement officials,
keeping crime away from American shores, enabling
the arrest of many U.S. fugitives and solving serious
U.S. crimes. This presence develops substantive
international links by creating personal networks of
law enforcement professionals dedicated to bringing
international criminals to justice.

In addition, training foreign law enforcement officers
is critical to combating international crime. Such
training helps create professional law enforcement
organizations and builds citizen confidence in law
enforcement officers, who understand and operate
under the rule of law. Training also builds a common
perspective and understanding of investigative
techniques that helps shape international law
enforcement priorities. The FBI and other federal law
enforcement agencies have provided extensive law
enforcement training at the International Law
Enforcement Academy in Budapest, Hungary and
elsewhere around the world. This training has proved
to be enormously effective in developing professional
law enforcement and security services in emerging
democracies.

Environmental Initiatives

Decisions today regarding the environment and
natural resources can affect our security for
generations. Environmental threats do not heed
national borders and can pose long-term dangers to
our security and well—being. Natural resource
scarcities can trigger and exacerbate conflict.
Environmental threats such as climate change, ozone
depletion and the transnational movement of
hazardous chemicals and waste directly threaten the
health of U.S. citizens.

We have a full diplomatic agenda, working bilaterally
and multilaterallyto respond aggressively to
environmental threats. The Global Environmental
Facility (GEF) is an important instrument for this
cooperation. With 161 member nations, the GEF is
specifically focused on reducing cross—border
environmental damage. Our Environmental Security

13

Initiative joins U.S. agencies with foreign partners to
address regional environmental concerns and thereby
reduce the risk to U.S. interests abroad. We have
also undertaken development of an environmental
forecasting system to provide U.S. policymakers
advance warning of environmental stress situations
which have the potential for significant impact on U.S.
interests.

At Kyoto in December 1997, the industrialized nations
of the world agreed for the first time to binding limits
on greenhouse gases. The agreement is strong and
comprehensive, covering the six greenhouse gases
whose concentrations are increasing due to human
activity. It reflects the commitment of the United
States to use the tools of the free market to tackle
this problem. It will enhance growth and create new
incentives for the rapid development of technologies
through a system of joint implementation and
emissions trading. The Kyoto agreement was a vital
turning point, but we still have a lot of hard work
ahead. We must press for meaningful participation
by key developing nations. Multilateral negotiations
are underway and we will pursue bilateral talks with
key developing nations. We will not submit the Kyoto
agreement for ratifica-tion until key developing
nations have agreed to participate meaningfully in
efforts to address global warming.

Additionally, we seek to accomplish the following:

- achieve increased compliance with the Montreal
Protocol through domestic and multilateral efforts
aimed at curbing illegal trade in ozone depleting
substances;

- ratify the Law of the Sea Convention, implement
the UN Straddling Stocks Agreement and help to
promote sustainable management of fisheries
worldwide;

- implement the Program of Action on population
growth developed at the 1994 Cairo Conference,
lead a renewed global effort to address population
problems and promote international consensus for
stabilizing world population growth;

- expand bilateral forest assistance programs and
promote sustainable management of tropical
forests;

- achieve Senate ratification of the Convention to
Combat Desertification;

14

- negotiate an international agreement to ban
twelve persistent organic pollutants, including
such hazardous chemicals as DDT;

- promote environment—related scientific research
in other countries so they can better identify
environmental problems and develop indigenous
solutions for them;

- increase international cooperation in fighting
transboundary environmental crime, including
trafficking in protected flora and fauna, hazard-
ous waste and ozone—depleting chemicals;

- ratify the Biodiversity Convention and take steps
to prevent biodiversity loss, including support for
agricultural research to relieve pressures on
forests, working with multilateral development
banks and others to prevent biodiversity loss in
key regions, and use of the Convention on
International Trade in Endangered Species to
protect threatened species; and

- continue to work with the Nordic countries and
Russia to mitigate nuclear and non-nuclear
pollution in the Arctic, and continue to encourage
Russia to develop sound management practices
for nuclear materials and radioactive waste.

Responding to Threats and
Crises

Because our shaping efforts alone cannot guarantee
the international security environment we seek, the
United States must be able to respond at home and
abroad to the full spectrum of threats and crises that
may arise. Our resources are finite, so we must be
selective in our responses, focusing on challenges
that most directly affect our interests and engaging
where we can make the most difference. Our
response might be diplomatic, economic, law
enforcement, or military in nature—or, more likely,
some combination of the above. We must use the
most appropriate tool or combination of tools—acting
in alliance or partnership when our interests are
shared by others, but unilaterally when compelling
national interests so demand. At home, we must
forge an effective partnership of Federal, state and
local government agencies, industry and other private
sector organizations.

When efforts to deter an adversary—be it a rogue
nation, terrorist group or criminal organization—occur
in the context of a crisis, they become the leading
edge of crisis response. In this sense, deterrence
straddles the line between shaping the international
environment and responding to crises. Deterrence in
crisis generally involves signaling the United States’
commitment to a particular country or interest by
enhancing our warfighting capability in the theater.
Forces in or near the theater may be moved closer to
the crisis and other forces rapidly deployed to the
area. The U.S. may also choose to make additional
statements to communicate the costs of aggression
or coercion to an adversary, and in some cases may
choose to employ U.S. forces to underline the
message and deter further adventurism.

The American people rightfully play a central role in
how the United States wields its power abroad. The
United States cannot long sustain a commitment
without the support of the public, and close
consultations with Congress are important in this
effort. When it is judged in America’s interest to
intervene, we must remain clear in purpose and
resolute in execution.

Transnational Threats

Today, American diplomats, law enforcement
officials, military personnel, members of the
intelligence community and others are increasingly
called upon to respond to growing transnational
threats, particularly terrorism, drug trafficking and
international organized crime.

Terrorism

To meet the growing challenge of terrorism, President
Clinton signed Presidential Decision Directive 62 in
May 1998. This Directive creates a new and more
systematic approach to fighting the terrorist threat of
the next century. It reinforces the mission of the
many U.S. agencies charged with roles in defeating
terrorism; it also codifies and clarifies their activities in
the wide range of U.S. counter—terrorism programs,
including apprehension and prosecution of terrorists,
increasing transportation security, and enhancing
incident response capabilities. The Directive will help
achieve the President’s goal of ensuring that we meet
the threat of terrorism in the 21 5‘ century.

Our policy to counter international terrorists rests on
the following principles: (1) make no concessions to
terrorists; (2) bring all pressure to bear on all state
sponsors of terrorism; (3) fully exploit all available
legal mechanisms to punish international terrorists;
and (4) help other governments improve their
capabilities to combat terrorism. Following these
principles, we seek to uncover and eliminate foreign
terrorists and their support networks in our country;
eliminate terrorist sanctuaries; and counter state-
supported terrorism and subversion of moderate
regimes through a comprehensive program of
diplomatic, law enforcement, economic, military and
intelligence activities. We are working to improve
aviation security at airports in the United States and
worldwide, to ensure better security for all U.S.
transportation systems, and to improve protection for
our personnel assigned overseas.

Countering terrorism effectively requires day—to—day
coordination within the U.S. Government and close
cooperation with other governments and international
organizations. Foreign terrorists will not be allowed to
enter the United States, and the full force of legal
authorities will be used to remove foreign terrorists
from the United States and prevent fundraising within
the United States to support foreign terrorist activity.
We have seen positive results from the increasing
integration of intelligence, diplomatic, military and law
enforcement activities among the Departments of
State, Justice, Defense, Treasury, Energy,
Transportation, the CIA and other intelligence
agencies. The Administration is working with
Congress to increase the ability of these agencies to
combat terrorism through augmented funding and
manpower.

The United States has made concerted efforts to
deter and punish terrorists and remains determined to
apprehend and bring to justice those who terrorize
American citizens. In January 1998, the United
States signed the International Convention for the
Suppression of Terrorist Bombings. The Convention
fills an important gap in international law by
expanding the legal framework for international
cooperation in the investigation, prosecution and
extradition of persons who engage in such bombings.
Whenever possible, we use law enforcement and
diplomatic tools to wage the fight against terrorism.
But there have been, and will be, times when law
enforcement and diplomatic tools are simply not
enough, when our very national security is
challenged, and when we must take extraordinary

15

steps to protect the safety of our citizens. As long as
terrorists continue to target American citizens, we
reserve the right to act in self defense by striking at
their bases and those who sponsor, assist or actively
support them. We exercised that right in 1993 with
the attack against Iraqi intelligence headquarters in
response to Baghdad’s assassination attempt against
former President Bush. We exercised that right again
in August 1998.

On August 7, 1998, 12 Americans and nearly 300
Kenyans and Tanzanians lost their lives, and another
5,000 were wounded when our embassies in Nairobi
and Dar es Salaam were bombed. Soon afterward,
our intelligence community acquired convincing
information from a variety of reliable sources that the
network of radical groups affiliated with Osama bin
Laden, perhaps the preeminent organizer and
financier of international terrorism in the world today,
planned, financed and carried out the bombings. The
groups associated with bin Laden come from diverse
places, but share a hatred for democracy, a fanatical
glorification of violence and a horrible distortion of
their religion to justify the murder of innocents. They
have made the United States their adversary
precisely because of what we stand for and what we
stand against.

On August 20, 1998, our Armed Forces carried out
strikes against terrorist facilities and infrastructure in
Afghanistan. Our forces targeted one of the most
active terrorist bases in the world. It contained key
elements of the bin Laden network's infrastructure
and has served as a training camp for literally
thousands of terrorists from around the globe. Our
forces also attacked a factory in Sudan associated
with the bin Laden network that was involved in the
production of materials for chemical weapons. The
strikes were a necessary and proportionate response
to the imminent threat of further terrorist attacks
against U.S. personnel and facilities. Afghanistan
and Sudan had been warned for years to stop
harboring and supporting these terrorist groups.
Countries that persistently host terrorists have no
right to be safe havens.

Placing terrorism at the top of the diplomatic agenda
has increased international information sharing and
law enforcement efforts. At the June 1997 Denver
Summit of the Eight, the leaders of Canada, France,
Germany, Italy, Japan, Russia, the United Kingdom
and the United States reaffirmed their determination
to combat terrorism in all forms, their opposition to

16

concessions to terrorist demands and their determi-
nation to deny hostage—takers any benefits from their
acts. They agreed to intensify diplomatic efforts to
ensure that by the year 2000 all States have joined
the international counterterrorism conventions
specified in the 1996 UN resolution on measures to
counter terrorism. The eight leaders also agreed to
strengthen the capability of hostage negotiation
experts and counterterrorism response units, to
exchange information on technologies to detect and
deter the use of weapons of mass destruction in
terrorist attacks, to develop means to deter terrorist
attacks on electronic and computer infrastructure, to
strengthen maritime security, to exchange informa-
tion on security practices for international special
events, and to strengthen and expand international
cooperation and consultation on terrorism.

International Crime

International crime is a serious and potent threat to
the American people at home and abroad. Drug
trafficking, illegal trade in firearms, financial crimes-
such as money laundering, counterfeiting, advanced
fee and credit card fraud, and income tax evasion-
illegal alien smuggling, trafficking in women and
children, economic espionage, intellectual property
theft, computer hacking and public corruption are all
linked to international criminal activity and all have a
direct impact on the security and prosperity of the
American people.

Efforts to combat international crime can have a
much broader impact than simply halting individual
criminal acts. The efficiency of the market place
depends on transparency and effective law
enforcement, which limit distorting factors such as
extortion and corruption. A free and efficient market
implies not only the absence of state control but also
limits on unlawful activities that impede rational
business decisions and fair competition. Additionally,
the integrity and reliability of the international financial
system will be improved by standardizing laws and
regulations governing financial institutions and
improving international law enforcement cooperation
in the financial sector.

To address the increasing threat from these diverse
criminal activities, we have formulated an
International Crime Control Strategy that provides a
framework for integrating the federal government

response to international crime. The strategy’s major
goals and initiatives are to:

- Extend our crime control efforts beyond U.S.
borders by intensifying activities of law
enforcement and diplomatic personnel abroad to
prevent criminal acts and prosecute select
criminal acts committed abroad.

- Protect U.S. borders by enhancing our inspection,
detection, monitoring and interdiction efforts,
seeking stiffer criminal penalties for smuggling,
and targeting law enforcement resources more
effectively against smugglers.

- Deny safe haven to international criminals by
negotiating new international agreements for
evidence sharing and prompt arrest and
extradition of fugitives (including nationals of the
requested country), implementing strengthened
immigration laws to prevent criminals from
entering the United States and provide for their
prompt expulsion when appropriate, and
promoting increased cooperation with foreign law
enforcement authorities.

- Counter international financial crime by
combating money laundering and reducing
movement of criminal proceeds, seizing the
assets of international criminals, enhancing
bilateral and multilateral cooperation against
financial crime, and targeting offshore sources of
international fraud, counterfeiting, electronic
access device schemes, income tax evasion and
other financial crimes.

- Prevent criminal exploitation of international trade
by interdicting illegal technology exports, prevent-
ing unfair and predatory trade practices, protect-
ing intellectual property rights, countering indus-
trial theft and economic espionage, and enforcing
import restrictions on harmful substances,
dangerous organisms and protected species. In
fiscal year 1997, the Customs Service seized $59
million in goods and $55 million in currency being
taken out of the country illegally.

- Respond to emerging international crime threats
by disrupting new activities of international
organized crime groups, enhancing intelligence
efforts, reducing trafficking in human beings
(involuntary servitude, alien smuggling, document
fraud and denial of human rights), crimes against

children, and increasing enforcement efforts
against high technology and computer—related
crime.

- Foster international cooperation and the rule of
law by establishing international standards, goals
and objectives to combat international crime and
by actively encouraging compliance, improving
bilateral cooperation with foreign governments
and law enforcement authorities, expanding U.S.
training and assistance programs in law
enforcement and administration of justice, and
strengthening the rule of law as the foundation for
democratic government and free markets.

The growing threat to our security from transnational
crime makes international law enforcement coopera-
tion vital. We are negotiating and implementing up-
dated extradition and mutual legal assistance treaties
that reflect the changing nature of international crime
and prevent terrorists and criminals from exploiting
national borders to escape prosecution. Moreover,
since the primary motivation of most international
criminals is greed, powerful asset seizure, forfeiture
and money laundering laws are key tools for taking
action against the financial underpinnings of interna-
tional crime. Increasing our enforcement powers
through bilateral and multilateral agreements and
efforts makes it harder for criminals to enjoy their ill-
gotten gains.

At the Birmingham Summit in May 1998, the leaders
of the G—8 adopted a wide range of measures to
strengthen the cooperative efforts against
international crime that they launched at their summit
in Lyon two years ago. They agreed to increase
cooperation on transnational high technology crime,
money laundering and financial crime, corruption,
environmental crimes, and trafficking in drugs,
firearms and women and children. They also agreed
to fully support negotiations on a UN Convention on
Transnational Organized Crime, which will broaden
many of the efforts underway among the G—8 to the
rest of the international community.

No area of criminal activity has greater international
implications than high technology crime because of
the global nature of information networks. Computer
hackers and other cyber-criminals are not hampered
by international boundaries, since information and
transactions involving funds or property can be
transmitted quickly and covertly via telephone and
information systems. Law enforcement faces difficult
challenges in this area, many of which are impossible

17

to address without international consensus and
cooperation. We seek to develop and implement new
agreements with other nations to address high
technology crime, particularly cyber—crime.

We are making a concerted effort at home and
abroad to shut down the illicit trade in firearms,
ammunition and explosives that fuels the violence
associated with terrorism, drug trafficking and
international crime. The President has signed
legislation amending the Arms Export Control Act to
expand our authority to monitor and regulate the
activities of arms brokers and we have intensified
reviews of applications for licenses to export firearms
from the United States to ensure that they are not
diverted to illicit purposes. The Bureau of Alcohol,
Tobacco and Firearms (ATF) has tightened up proof
of residency requirements for aliens purchasing
firearms from dealers in the United States, and ATF
and the Customs Service have intensified their
interdiction and investigative efforts at U.S. borders.

In the international arena, the United States is
working with its partners in the G—8 and through the
UN Crime Commission to expand cooperation on
combating illicit arms trafficking. In November 1997,
the United States and its partners in the Organization
of American States (OAS) signed the Inter-American
Convention Against the Illicit Manufacturing of and
Trafficking in Firearms—the first international
agreement designed to prevent, com bat and
eradicate illegal trafficking in firearms, ammunition
and explosives. We are now negotiating an
international agreement that would globalize the OAS
convention. Additionally, the ATF and Customs
Service have provided training and assistance to
other nations on tracing firearms, combating internal
smuggling and related law enforcement topics.

Drug Trafficking

We have shown that with determined and relentless
efforts, we can make significant progress against the
scourge of drug abuse and drug trafficking. In the
United States, drug use has dropped 49 percent
since 1979. Recent studies show that drug use by
our young people is stabilizing, and in some
categories, declining. Overall, cocaine use has
dropped 70 percent since 1985 and the crack
epidemic has begun to recede. Today, Americans
spend 37 percent less on drugs than a decade ago.

18

That means over $34 billion reinvested in our society,
rather than squandered on drugs.

The aim of the U.S. National Drug Control Strategy is
to cut drug availability in the United States by half
over the next 10 years—and reduce the
consequences of drug use and trafficking by 25
percent over the same period—through expanded
prevention efforts, improved treatment programs,
strengthened law enforcement and tougher
interdiction. Our strategy recognizes that, at home
and abroad, prevention, treatment and economic
alternatives must be integrated with intelligence
collection, law enforcement and interdiction. Its
ultimate success will require concerted efforts by the
public, all levels of government and the private sector
together with other governments, private groups and
international organizations.

Domestically, we seek to educate and enable
America's youth to reject illegal drugs, increase the
safety of America’s citizens by substantially reducing
drug—related crime and violence, reduce health and
social costs to the public of illegal drug use, and
shield America’s air, land and sea frontiers from the
drug threat. Working with Congress and the private
sector, the Administration has launched a major
antidrug youth media campaign and will seek to
extend this program through 2002. With
congressional support and matching dollars from the
private sector, we will commit to a five—year, $2 billion
public-private partnership to educate our children to
reject drugs.

In concert with our allies abroad, we seek to stop
drug trafficking by reducing cultivation of drug-
producing crops, interdicting the flow of drugs at the
source and in transit (particularly in Central and South
America, the Caribbean, Mexico and Southeast Asia),
and stopping drugs from entering our country. The
Strategy includes efforts to strengthen democratic
institutions and root out corruption in source nations,
prosecute major international drug traffickers and
destroy trafficking organizations, prevent money
laundering and use of commercial air and maritime
transportation for drug smuggling, and eradicate
illegal drug crops and encourage alternate crop
development or alternative employment in source
nations. We seek to achieve a counterdrug alliance
in this hemisphere, one that could serve as a model
for enhanced cooperation in other regions.

The United States is aggressively engaging
international organizations, financial institutions and
non—governmental organizations in counternarcotics
cooperation. At the Birmingham Summit in May
1998, the leaders of the G—8 endorsed the principle of
shared responsibility for combating drugs, including
cooperative efforts focused on both eradication and
demand reduction. They agreed to reinforce
cooperation on reducing demand and curbing
trafficking in drugs and chemical precursors. They
also agreed on the need for a global strategy to
eradicate illicit drugs. The United States supports the
UN International Drug Control Program’s goal of
dramatically reducing coca and opium poppy
cultivation by 2008 and the program’s efforts to
combat drug production, trafficking and abuse in
some of the most remote regions of the world. At the
UN General Assembly Special Session on drug
trafficking and abuse in June 1998, President Clinton
and other world leaders strengthened existing
international counterdrug institutions, reconfirmed the
global partnership against drug abuse and stressed
the need for a coordinated international approach to
combating drug trafficking.

Emerging Threats at Home

Due to our military superiority, potential enemies,
whether nations or terrorist groups, may be more
likely in the future to resort to terrorist acts or other
attacks against vulnerable civilian targets in the
United States instead of conventional military
operations. At the same time, easier access to
sophisticated technology means that the destructive
power available to terrorists is greater than ever.
Adversaries may thus be tempted to use
unconventional tools, such as WMD or information
attacks, to threaten our citizens, and critical national
infrastructures.

Managing the Consequences of WMD
Incidents

Presidential Decision Directive 62, signed in May
1998, established an overarching policy and
assignment of responsibilities for responding to
terrorist acts involving WMD. The Federal Govern-
ment will respond rapidly and decisively to any
terrorist incident in the United States, working with
state and local governments to restore order and
deliver emergency assistance. The Department of
Justice, acting through the FBI, has the overall lead in
operational response to a WMD incident. The

Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
supports the FBI in preparing for and responding to
the consequences of a WMD incident.

The Domestic Terrorism Program is integrating the
capabilities and assets of a number of Federal
agencies to support the FBI, FEMA and state and
local governments in consequence management.
The program’s goal is to build a capability in 120
major U.S. cities for first responders to be able to
deal with WMD incidents by 2002. In fiscal year
1997, the Defense Department provided training to
nearly 1,500 metropolitan emergency responders-
firefighters, law enforcement officials and medical
personnel—in four cities. In fiscal year 1998, the
program will reach 31 cities. Eventually, this training
will reach all cities via the Internet, video and CD
ROM.

Under the Domestic Terrorism Program, the Defense
Department will maintain military units to serve as
augmentation forces for weapons of mass destruction
consequence management and to help maintain
proficiency of local emergency responders through
periodic training and exercises. The National Guard,
with its mission and long tradition of responding to
national emergencies, has an important role to play in
this effort. The President announced in May 1998
that the Defense Department will train Army National
Guard and reserve elements to assist state and local
authorities to manage the consequences of a WMD
attack. This training will be given to units in
Massachusetts, New York, Pennsylvania, Georgia,
Illinois, Texas, Missouri, Colorado, California and
Washington.

The Domestic Terrorism Program enlists the support
of other agencies as well. The Department of Energy
plans for and provides emergency responder training
for nuclear and radiological incidents. The
Environmental Protection Agency plans for and
provides emergency responder training for hazardous
materials and environmental incidents. The
Department of Health and Human Services, through
the Public Health Service and with the support of the
Department of Veterans Affairs and other Federal
agencies, plans and prepares for a national response
to medical emergencies arising from the terrorist use
of weapons of mass destruction.

The threat of biological weapons is particularly

troubling. In his May 1998 commencement speech at
Annapolis, the President announced a

19

comprehensive strategy to protect our civilian
population from the scourge of biological weapons.
There are four critical areas of focus:

- First, if a hostile nation or terrorists release
bacteria or viruses to harm Americans, we must
be able to identify the pathogens with speed and
certainty. We will upgrade our public health and
medical surveillance systems. These
improvements will benefit not only our
preparedness for a biological weapons attack-
they will enhance our ability to respond quickly
and effectively to outbreaks of emerging
infectious diseases.

- Second, our emergency response personnel
must have the training and equipment to do their
jobs right. As described above, we will help
ensure that federal, state and local authorities
have the resources and knowledge they need to
deal with a crisis.

- Third, we must have the medicines and vaccines
needed to treat those who fall sick or prevent
those at risk from falling ill because of a biological
weapons attack. The President will propose the
creation of a civilian stockpile of medicines and
vaccines to counter the pathogens most likely to
be in the hands of terrorists or hostile powers.

- Fourth, the revolution in biotechnology offers
enormous possibilities for combating biological
weapons. We will coordinate research and
development efforts to use the advances in
genetic engineering and biotechnology to create
the next generation of medicines, vaccines and
diagnostic tools for use against these weapons.
At the same time, we must continue our efforts to
prevent biotechnology innovations from being
applied to development of ever more difficult to
counter biological weapons.

Protecting Critical Infrastructures

Our military power and national economy are
increasingly reliant upon interdependent critical
infrastructures—the physical and information systems
essential to the operations of the economy and
government. They include telecommunications,
energy, banking and finance, transportation, water
systems and emergency services. It has long been
the policy of the United States to assure the continuity

20

and viability of these critical infrastructures. But
advances in information technology and competitive
pressure to improve efficiency and productivity have
created new vulnerabilities to both physical and
information attacks as these infrastructures have
become increasingly automated and interlinked. If we
do not implement adequate protective measures,
attacks on our critical infrastructures and information
systems by nations, groups or individuals might be
capable of significantly harming our military power
and economy.

To enhance our ability to protect these critical
infrastructures, the President signed Presidential
Decision Directive 63 in May 1998. This directive
makes it U.S. policy to take all necessary measures
to swiftly eliminate any significant vulnerability to
physical or information attacks on our critical
infrastructures, especially our information systems.
We will achieve and maintain the ability to protect
them from intentional acts that would significantly
diminish the abilities of the Federal Government to
perform essential national security missions and to
ensure the general public health and safety. We will
protect the ability of state and local governments to
maintain order and to deliver minimum essential
public services. And we will work with the private
sector to ensure the orderly functioning of the
economy and the delivery of essential
telecommunications, energy, financial and
transportation services. Any interruption or
manipulation of these critical functions must be brief,
infrequent, manageable, isolated and minimally
detrimental to the welfare of the United States.

The National Infrastructure Protection Center (NIPC)
integrates relevant federal, state, and local govern-
ment entities as well as the private sector, and
provides the national focal point for gathering
information on threats to the infrastructures. It serves
as a national resource for identifying and assessing
threats, warning about vulnerabilities, and conducting
criminal investigations. The NIPC will also coordinate
the federal government’s response to an incident,
including mitigation, investigation and monitoring
reconstruction efforts.

Smaller-Scale Contingencies

Smaller—scale contingency operations encompass the
full range of military operations short of major theater
warfare, including humanitarian assistance, peace

operations, enforcing embargoes and no—fly zones,
evacuating U.S. citizens, reinforcing key allies, and
limited strikes and intervention. These operations will
likely pose the most frequent challenge for U.S.
forces and cumulatively require significant
commitments over time. These operations will also
put a premium on the ability of the U.S. military to
work closely and effectively with other U.S.
Government agencies, non—governmental
organizations, regional and international security
organizations and coalition partners.

Under certain circumstances the U.S. military may
provide appropriate and necessary humanitarian
assistance. Those circumstances are when a natural
or manmade disaster dwarfs the ability of the normal
relief agencies to respond or the need for relief is
urgent, and the military has a unique ability to
respond quickly with minimal risk to American lives.
In these cases, the United States may intervene when
the costs and risks are commensurate with the
stakes involved and when there is reason to believe
that our action can make a real difference. Such
efforts by the United States and the international
community will be limited in duration, have a clearly
defined end state and be designed to give the
affected country the opportunity to restore its own
basic services. This policy recognizes that the U.S.
military normally is not the best tool for addressing
long-term humanitarian concerns and that, ultimately,
responsibility for the fate of a nation rests with its own
people.

At times it will be in our national interest to proceed in
partnership with others to preserve, maintain and
restore peace. American participation in peace
operations takes many forms, such as the NATO—led
coalition in Bosnia, the American-led UN force in
Haiti, the Military Observer Mission Ecuador and Peru
(MOMEP), and our participation in the multilateral
coalition operation in the Sinai. The question of
command and control in multinational contingency
operations is particularly critical. Under no
circumstances will the President ever relinquish his
constitutionally mandated command authority over
U.S. forces, but there may be times when it is in our
interest to place U.S. forces under the temporary
operational control of a competent allied or United
Nations commander.

Not only must the U.S. military be prepared to
successfully conduct multiple smaller—scale
contingencies worldwide, it must be prepared to do so
in the face of challenges such as terrorism,
information operations and the threat or use of
weapons of mass destruction. U.S. forces must also
remain prepared to withdraw from contingency
operations if needed to deploy to a major theater war.
Accordingly, appropriate U.S. forces will be kept at a
high level of readiness and will be trained, equipped
and organized to be multi—mission capable.

21

Major Theater Warfare

Fighting and winning major theater wars is the
ultimate test of our Total Force—a test at which it
must always succeed. For the foreseeable future, the
United States, preferably in concert with allies, must
remain able to deter and defeat large—scale, cross-
border aggression in two distant theaters in
overlapping time frames. Maintaining such a
capability deters opportunism elsewhere while we are
heavily committed to deterring or defeating
aggression in one theater, or while conducting
multiple smaller—scale contingencies and engagement
activities in other theaters. It also provides a hedge
against the possibility that we might encounter threats
larger or more difficult than we expected. A strategy
for deterring and defeating aggression in two theaters
ensures we maintain the capability and flexibility to
meet unknown future threats, while continued global
engagement helps preclude such threats from
developing.

Fighting and winning major theater wars entails at
least three particularly challenging requirements.
First, we must maintain the ability to rapidly defeat
initial enemy advances short of enemy objectives in
two theaters, in close succession. The United States
must maintain this ability to ensure that we can seize
the initiative, minimize territory lost before an invasion
is halted and ensure the integrity of our warfighting
coalitions. To meet this challenge, the forces that
would be first to respond to an act of aggression are
kept at full readiness, and the forces that follow them
are kept at a level that supports their being ready to
deploy and go into action when called for in the
operations plan for the contingency.

Second, the United States must plan and prepare to
fight and win under conditions where an adversary
may use asymmetric means against us—
unconventional approaches that avoid or undermine
our strengths while exploiting our vulnerabilities. This
is of particular importance and a significant challenge.
Because of our dominance in the conventional
military arena, adversaries who challenge the United
States are likely to use asymmetric means, such as
WMD, information operations or terrorism.

22

The WMD threat to our forces is receiving the special
attention it deserves. We are enhancing the
preparedness of our Armed Forces to effectively
conduct sustained operations despite the presence,
threat or use of WMD. Such preparedness requires
the capability to deter, detect, protect against and
respond to the use of WMD when necessary. The
Administration has significantly increased funding to
enhance biological and chemical defense capabilities
and has begun the vaccination of military personnel
against the anthrax bacteria, the most feared
biological weapon threat today. These efforts
reinforce our deterrent posture and complement our
nonproliferation efforts by reducing the political and
military value of WMD and their means of delivery.

We are enhancing our ability to defend against hostile
information operations, which could in the future take
the form of a full—scale, strategic information attack
against our critical national infrastructures,
government and economy—as well as attacks
directed against our military forces. As other
countries develop their capability to conduct offensive
information operations, we must ensure that our
national and defense information infrastructures are
well protected and that we can quickly recognize,
defend against and respond decisively to an
information attack.

Third, our military must also be able to transition to
fighting major theater wars from a posture of global
engagement—from substantial levels of peacetime
engagement overseas as well as multiple concurrent
smaller—scale contingencies. Withdrawing from such
operations would pose significant political and
operational challenges. Ultimately, however, the
United States must accept a degree of risk
associated with withdrawing from contingency
operations and engagement activities in order to
reduce the greater risk incurred if we failed to
respond adequately to major theater wars.

Our priority is to shape effectively the international
environment so as to deter the onset of major theater
wars. Should deterrence fail, however, the United
States will defend itself, its allies and partners with all
means necessary.

Preparing Now for an
Uncertain Future

We must prepare for an uncertain future even as we
address today’s security problems. This requires that
we keep our forces ready for shaping and responding
requirements in the near term, while at the same time
evolving our unparalleled capabilities to ensure we
can effectively shape and respond in the future.

The 1997 Quadrennial Defense Review (QDR) struck
a fine balance between near—term readiness, long-
term modernization and quality of life improvements
for our men and women in uniform. A key element of
this balance was our decision to increase funding for
modernization to protect long-term readiness. In this
context we decided to make modest reductions in
personnel, primarily in support positions, across the
force structure. But in all these decisions we ensured
that the high readiness levels of our forward—deployed
and "first—to—fight" forces were maintained. While
preparing for the challenges of the next century, the
readiness of today’s force remains one of our highest
priorities. That is why the Administration, in
partnership with the Congress, will continue to assure
we maintain the best—trained, best-equipped and
best—led military force in the world for the 215‘
Century.

Government—wide, we will continue to foster
innovative approaches, capabilities, technologies and
organizational structures to better protect American
lives, property and interests at home and abroad. In
our defense efforts, we will continue to explore new
approaches for integrating the Active and Reserve
components into a Total Force optimum for future
missions, modernize our forces, ensure the quality of
military personnel, and take prudent steps to position
ourselves to effectively counter unlikely but significant
future threats. We will also continue our rapidly
growing efforts to integrate and improve the capability
of Federal, state and local agencies—and our private
sector partners—to protect against and respond to
transnational threats at home.

The military challenges of the 21 st century, coupled
with the aging of key elements of the U.S. force
structure, require a fundamental transformation of our
military forces. Although future threats are fluid and
unpredictable, U.S. forces are likely to confront a
variety of challenges across the spectrum of conflict,
including efforts to deny our forces access to critical

regions, urban warfare, information warfare, and
attacks from chemical and biological weapons. To
meet these challenges, we must transform our forces
by exploiting the Revolution in Military Affairs.
Improved intelligence collection and assessment
coupled with modern information processing,
navigation and command and control capabilities are
at the heart of the transformation of our warfighting
capabilities. Through a carefully planned and focused
modernization program, we can maintain our
technological superiority and replace Cold War—era
equipment with new systems capable of taking full
advantage of emerging technologies. With these
advanced systems, the U.S. military will be able to
respond rapidly to any contingency, dominate the
battlespace and conduct day—to—day operations much
more efficiently and effectively.

To support this transformation of our military forces,
we will work cooperatively with the Congress to enact
legislation to implement the Defense Reform
Initiative, which will free up resources through a
Revolution in Business Affairs. This revolution
includes privatization, acquisition reform and
elimination of excess infrastructure through two
additional base realignment and closure (BRAC)
rounds in 2001 and 2005. The Revolution in Military
Affairs and the Revolution in Business Affairs are
interlocking revolutions: With both, and only with both,
we will ensure that U.S. forces continue to have
unchallenged superiority in the 21 5‘ century.

It is critical that we renew our commitment to
America’s diplomacy—to ensure we have the
diplomatic representation required to support our
global interests. This is central to our ability to remain
an influential voice on international issues that affect
our well—being. We will preserve that influence so
long as we retain the diplomatic capabilities, military
wherewithal and economic base to underwrite our
commitments credibly.

We must continue aggressive efforts to construct
appropriate twenty—first century national security
programs and structures. The Defense Department,
State Department and other international affairs
agencies are similarly reorganizing to confront the

23

pressing challenges of tomorrow as well as those we
face today. Federal, state and local law enforcement
and emergency response agencies are enhancing
their ability to deal with terrorist threats. Government
and industry are exploring ways to protect critical
national infrastructures. We will continue looking
across our government to see if during this time of
transition we are adequately preparing to meet the
national security challenges of the next century.

Without preparing today to face the pressing
challenges of tomorrow, our ability to exert global
leadership and to create international conditions
conducive to achieving our national goals would be in
doubt. Thus, we must strive to strike the right
balance between the near—term readiness
requirements of shaping and responding and the
longer—term transformation requirements associated
with preparing now for national security challenges in
the twenty—first century.

Overarching Capabilities

Certain capabilities and technologies are critical to
protecting the United States itself and to the
worldwide application of U.S. national power for
shaping the international environment and responding
to the full spectrum of threats and crises.

Quality People

Quality people—military and civilian—are our most
critical asset. The quality of our men and women in
uniform will be the deciding factor in all future military
operations. In order to fully realize the benefits of the
transformation of our military forces, we must ensure
that we remain the most fully prepared and best
trained fighting force in the world. Our people will
continue to remain the linchpin to successfully
exploiting our military capabilities across the
spectrum of conflict. To ensure the quality of our
military personnel, we will continue to place the
highest priority on initiatives and programs that
support recruiting, quality of life, and the training and
education of our men and women in uniform.

We must also have quality civilian personnel in the
government agencies that support our national
security, from our diplomatic corps, to the intelligence
community and law enforcement. Effectively
countering transnational threats requires personnel

24

with a variety of highly specialized skills that either are
not readily available in the private sector, or are in
high demand in the private sector. Persons with
advanced training in information technology are a
prominent example. Recruiting and retaining quality
people with requisite skills is a significant challenge,
and we are exploring innovative approaches for
ensuring that government personnel needs are met.

Intelligence, Surveillance and
Reconnaissance

Our intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance
(ISR) capabilities are critical instruments for
implementing our national security strategy. The U.S.
intelligence community provides critical support to the
full range of our activities abroad—diplomatic,
military, law enforcement, and environmental.
Comprehensive collection and analytic capabilities
are needed to provide warning of threats to U.S.
national security, give analytical support to the policy
and military communities, provide near—real time
intelligence in times of crisis while retaining global
perspective, identify opportunities for advancing our
national interests, and maintain our information
advantage in the international arena.

ISR operations must cover a wider range of threats
and policy needs than ever before. We place the
highest priority on preserving and enhancing
intelligence capabilities that provide information on
states and groups that pose the most serious threats
to U.S. security. Current intelligence priorities include
states whose policies and actions are hostile to the
United States; countries or other entities that possess
strategic nuclear forces or control nuclear weapons,
other WMD or nuclear fissile materials; transnational
threats, including terrorism, international crime and
drug trafficking; potential regional conflicts that might
affect U.S. national security interests; intensified
counterintelligence against foreign intelligence
collection inimical to U.S. interests, including
economic and industrial espionage; information
warfare threats; and threats to U.S. forces and
citizens abroad. Intelligence support is also required
to develop and implement U.S. policies to promote
democracy abroad, identify threats to our information
and space systems, monitor arms control
agreements, support humanitarian efforts and protect
the environment.

Our ISR capabilities include world—wide collection of
news and media broadcasts, reporting from
informants close to important events abroad, space-
based and airborne collection of imagery and signals
intelligence, and integrated, in-depth analysis of all
these sources by highly skilled analysts. Exploiting
our tremendous advantage in continuous, non-
intrusive, space—based imaging and information
processing, the ISR system provides the ability to
monitor treaty compliance, military movements and
the development, testing and deployment of weapons
of mass destruction. Using ISR products to support
diplomatic and military action contributes to global
security by demonstrating that the United States is an
invaluable ally, or would be a formidable foe.

U.S. intelligence capabilities were reviewed twice by
independent panels in 1998. In the wake of the May
1998 Indian nuclear tests, retired Admiral David E.
Jeremiah led a panel that examined the Intelligence
Community’s ability to detect and monitor foreign
nuclear weapons programs. In July 1998, the
Commission to Assess the Ballistic Missile Threat to
the United States issued a report on the challenges
we face in attempting to monitor the progress of
foreign ballistic missile programs. Both reviews
identified specific areas of intelligence collection and
analysis that need improvement. The Intelligence
Community is taking aggressive action to improve its
capabilities in those areas and we will work closely
with the Congress to address the recommendations
in the two reports.

While our ISR capabilities are increasingly enhanced
by and dependent upon advanced technologies, there
remains no substitute for informed, subjective human
judgment. We must continue to attract and retain
enough highly qualified people to provide human
intelligence collection, translation and analysis in
those many emerging areas where there simply is no
technological substitute, and we must forge strong
links to the private enterprises and public institutions
whose expertise is especially critical. Increased
cooperation among the agencies in the Intelligence
Community and the fusion of all intelligence
disciplines provide the most effective collection and
analysis of data on high priority intelligence issues.

We must also be mindful of the continuing need for
effective security and counterintelligence programs.
To protect sensitive national security information, we
must be able to effectively counter the collection
efforts of foreign intelligence services through

vigorous counterintelligence efforts, comprehensive
security programs and constant evaluation of the
intentions and targets of foreign intelligence services.
Counterintelligence remains integral to and underlies
the entire intelligence mission, whether the threat
comes from traditional espionage or the theft of our
vital economic information. Countering foreign efforts
to gather technological, industrial and commercial
information requires close cooperation between
government and the private sector. Awareness of the
threat and adherence to prescribed personnel,
information and physical security standards and
procedures, based on risk management principles,
are critical.

Space

We are committed to maintaining our leadership in
space. Unimpeded access to and use of space is
essential for protecting U.S. national security,
promoting our prosperity and ensuring our well—being
in countless ways.

Space has emerged in this decade as a new global
information utility with extensive political, diplomatic,
military and economic implications for the United
States. We are experiencing an ever—increasing
migration of capabilities to space as the world seeks to
exploit the explosion in information technology.
Telecommunications, telemedicine, international
financial transactions and global entertainment, news,
education, weather and navigation all contribute directly
to the strength of our economy—and all are dependent
upon space capabilities. Over 500 US companies are
directly involved in the space industry, with 1996
revenues of $77 billion projected to reach $122 billion
by 2000.

Our policy is to promote development of the full range

of space—based capabilities in a manner that protects
our vital security interests. We will deter

25

threats to our interests in space and, if deterrence
fails, defeat hostile efforts against U.S. access to and
use of space. We will also maintain the ability to
counter space systems and services that could be
used for hostile purposes against our ground, air and
naval forces, our command and control system, or
other capabilities critical to our national security. We
are carefully regulating U.S. commercial space—based
remote sensing to ensure that space imagery is not
used to the detriment of U.S. security interests. At
the same time, we will continue efforts to prevent the
spread of weapons of mass destruction to space, and
continue to form global partnerships with other space-
faring nations across the spectrum of economic,
political, environmental and security issues. These
efforts require a balanced approach across all types
of U.S. space assets—national security, military, and
commercial. We will remain vigilant to ensure that we
do not compromise our technological superiority while
promoting partnerships in space.

Missile Defense

We have robust missile defense development and
deployment programs focused on systems to protect
deployed U.S. forces and our friends and allies
against theater ballistic missiles armed with
conventional weapons or WMD. These systems will
complement and strengthen our deterrence and
nonproliferation efforts by reducing incentives to
develop or use WMD. Significantly, Presidents
Clinton and Yeltsin agreed at the Helsinki Summit to
maintain the ABM Treaty as a cornerstone of
strategic stability, yet adapt it to meet the threat
posed by shorter—range missiles—a threat we seek to
counter with U.S. theater missile defense (TMD)
systems. The ABM-TMD demarcation agreement
signed in New York on September 26, 1997 helps
clarify the distinction between ABM systems, which
the ABM Treaty limits, and TMD systems, which the
ABM Treaty does not limit. The demarcation
agreement does not limit any current U.S. core TMD
programs, all of which have been certified by the
United States as compliant with the ABM Treaty.

Although it remains the view of the intelligence
community that it is unlikely that countries other than
Russia, China and perhaps North Korea will deploy
an ICBM capable of reaching any part of the U.S.
before 2010, we are developing, consistent with our
obligations under the ABM Treaty, a limited national
missile defense capability that would position the U.S.

26

to make a decision as early as the year 2000 to
deploy within three years a credible national missile
defense system.

National Security Emergency
Preparedness

We will do all we can to deter and prevent destructive
and threatening forces such as terrorism, WMD use,
disruption of our critical infrastructures, natural
disasters and regional or state—centered threats from
endangering our citizens. But if an emergency
occurs, we must also be prepared to respond
effectively at home and abroad to protect lives and
property, mobilize the personnel, resources and
capabilities necessary to effectively handle the
emergency, and ensure the survival of our institutions
and national infrastructures. National security
emergency preparedness is imperative, and
comprehensive, all-hazard emergency planning by
Federal departments, agencies and the military
continues to be a crucial national security
requirement.

Overseas Presence and Power
Projection

Due to our alliance commitments and other vital
interests overseas, we must have a force structure
and deployment posture that enable us to success-
fully conduct military operations across the spectrum
of conflict, often in theaters distant from the United
States. Maintaining a substantial overseas presence
promotes regional stability by giving form and
substance to our bilateral and multilateral security
commitments and helps prevent the development of
power vacuums and instability. It contributes to
deterrence by demonstrating our determination to
defend U.S., allied, and friendly interests in critical
regions and better positions the United States to
respond rapidly to crises. Equally essential is
effective and efficient global power projection, which
is the key to the flexibility demanded or our forces and
ultimately provides our national leaders with more
options in responding to potential crises and conflicts.
Being able to project power allows us to shape, deter,
and respond even when we have no permanent
presence or a limited infrastructure in the region.

Extensive transportation, logistics and command,
control, communications and intelligence (C3I)
capabilities are unique U.S. strengths that enhance
our conventional deterrent and helps to shape the
international environment. Strategic mobility allows
the United States to be first on the scene with
assistance in many national or international crises
and is a key to successful American leadership and
engagement. The deployment of US and
multinational forces requires maintaining and
ensuring access to sufficient fleets of aircraft, ships,
vehicles and trains, as well as bases, ports,
prepositioned equipment and other infrastructure.
The United States must have a robust Defense
Transportation System, including both military assets
and U.S. flag commercial sealift and airlift, to remain
actively engaged in world affairs.

Our need for strategic mobility to deploy our forces
overseas is one of the primary reasons we are
committed to gaining Senate advice and consent to
ratification of the Law of the Sea Convention. Need
for this treaty arose from the breakdown of customary
international law as more and more nations
unilaterally declared ever larger territorial seas and
other claims over the oceans that threatened the
global access and freedom of navigation that the
United States must have to protect its vital national
interests. In addition to lending the certainty of the
rule of law to an area critical to our national security,
the treaty protects our economic interests and
preserves our leadership in global ocean policy. The
Law of the Sea Convention thus buttresses the
strategic advantages that the United States gains
from being a global power.

Promoting Prosperity

The second core objective of our national security
strategy is to promote America’s prosperity through
efforts at home and abroad. Our economic and
security interests are inextricably linked. Prosperity at
home depends on stability in key regions with which we
trade or from which we import critical commodities,
such as oil and natural gas. Prosperity also demands
our leadership in international development, financial
and trade institutions. In turn, the strength of our
diplomacy, our ability to maintain an unrivaled military
and the attractiveness of our values abroad depend in
large part on the strength of our economy.

Strengthening Macroeconomic
Coordination

As national economies become more integrated
internationally, the United States cannot thrive in
isolation from developments abroad. Our economic
health is vulnerable to disturbances that originate
outside our borders. As such, cooperation with other
states and international organizations is vital to
protecting the health of the global economic system
and responding to financial crises.

The recent financial troubles in Asia have
demonstrated that global financial markets dominated
by private capital flows provide both immense
opportunities and great challenges. Developing ways
to strengthen the international financial architecture is
an urgent and compelling challenge. At the
November 1997 Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation
Forum (APEC) meeting, President Clinton and the
other APEC leaders agreed to hold a series of
meetings of finance ministers and central bank
governors to address the Asian financial crisis and
international financial reform. The meetings began in
February 1998 with representatives from 22 countries
and observers from the major international financial
institutions. The ongoing efforts of this group,
commonly referred to as the Willard Group or G—22,
has helped to identify measures to prevent and better
manage financial crises and reform the international
financial system.

The ultimate objective of our reform efforts is a
stable, resilient global financial system that promotes
strong global economic growth providing benefits
broadly to workers and investors in all countries.
International financial institutions, particularlythe
International Monetary Fund (IMF), have a critical role
to play in this effort by promoting greater openness
and transparency, by building strong national financial
systems, and by creating mechanisms so that the
private sector shares more fully in the responsibility
for preventing and resolving crises.

Openness and Transparency: For capital to flow
freely and safely to where it can be used most
efficiently to promote growth, high quality information
about each economy and investment opportunity
must also be freely available. The IMF introduced the
Special Data Dissemination Standard (SDDS) in 1996
to improve the information collection and publication
practices of countries accessing international capital

27

markets. At present, 45 countries subscribe to the
SDDS, but we need to encourage those IMF
members who do not subscribe but seek access to
international capital markets—particularly emerging
market economies—to participate in the SDDS.
International financial institutions also have a
responsibility to make their activities open and
transparent as a means of enhancing their credibility
and accountability. The IMF recently has shown
leadership in promoting openness and transparency;
however, more needs be done in this area.

Financial Sector Reform: The |MF's recent review of
the Asian crisis experience highlighted the key role
played by the domestic financial sector as the flash
point and transmission mechanism for the crisis and
contagion. Rapid growth and expanding access to
international capital had run ahead of the
development in countries in trouble of a genuine
credit culture to assess risk and channel investment
efficiently and of an effective financial sector
regulatory and supervisory mechanism. The situation
was further exacerbated by inconsistent
macroeconomic policies, generous explicit and
implicit government guarantees, significant injections
of public funds to provide liquidity support to weak
institutions, and to some extent capital controls that
distorted the composition of capital flows.

Crisis Resolution: Our efforts to reduce the risks of
crises caused by poor policy or investor decisions
need to be complemented by measures to equip
investors, governments and the international financial
system with the means to deal with those crises that
do occur. The IMF plays the central role in the
system by providing conditional international
assistance to give countries the breathing room to
stabilize their economies and restore market
confidence. Two U.S.—inspired initiatives have
enhanced the |MF's role: the Emergency Financing
Mechanism, which provides for rapid agreement to
extraordinary financing requests in return for more
intense regular scrutiny, and the Supplemental
Reserve Facility, which enables the IMF to lend at
premium rates in short—term liquidity crises and
improve borrower incentives. To fulfill its crisis
resolution responsibility, the IMF must have adequate
resources. We are concerned that IMF liquidity has
fallen to dangerously low levels that could impair the
Fund's capacity to respond to renewed pressures and
meet normal demands. The Administration is making
an intensive effort to obtain the necessary

28

Congressional approval to meet our obligations to the
IMF.

Recent crises have brought home that in a global
financial market we need to find more effective
mechanisms for sharing with the private sector the
burden of managing such problems. In a world in
which trillions of dollars flow through international
markets every day, there is simply not going to be
enough official financing to meet the crises that could
take place. Moreover, official financing should not
absolve private investors from the consequences of
excessive risk—taking and thus create the "moral
hazard" that could plant the seeds of future crises.

Broadening the Financial Reform Agenda: In
recent years, the IMF has broadened its perspective
to take account of a wider range of issues necessary
for economic growth and financial stability. It is
seeking to create a more level playing field in which
private sector com petition can thrive; reduce
unproductive government spending, including
excessive military expenditures and subsidies and
guarantees to favored sectors and firms; protect the
most vulnerable segments of society from bearing the
brunt of the burden of adjustment; and encourage
more effective participation by labor and the rest of
civil society in the formulation and implementation of
economic policies, including protection of labor rights.

The United States and the other leading industrialized
nations are also promoting a range of World Bank and
regional development bank reforms that the United
States has been urging for a number of years. Key
elements include substantially increasing the share of
resources devoted to basic social programs that
reduce poverty; safeguarding the environment;
supporting development of the private sector and open
markets; promotion of good governance, including
measures to fight corruption and improve the
administration of justice; and internal reforms of the
multilateral development banks (MDBs) to make them
more efficient. Furthermore, international financial
institutions such as the IMF and MDBs have played a
strong role in recent years in countries and regions of
key interest to the United States, such as Russia, the
Middle East, Haiti and Bosnia.

Enhancing American
Competitiveness

We seek to ensure a business environment in which
the innovative and competitive efforts of the private
sector can flourish. To this end, we will continue to
encourage the development, commercialization and
use of civilian technology. We will invest in a world-
class infrastructure for the twenty—first century,
including the national information and space
infrastructure essential for our knowledge—based
economy. We will invest in education and training to
develop a workforce capable of participating in our
rapidly changing economy. And we will continue our
efforts to open foreign markets to U.S. goods and
services.

Enhancing Access to Foreign
Markets

In a world where over 95 percent of the world’s
consumers live outside the United States, we must
expand our international trade to sustain economic
growth at home. Our prosperity as a nation in the
twenty—first century will depend upon our ability to
compete effectively in international markets. The
rapidly expanding global economy presents enor-
mous opportunities for American companies and

workers. Over the next decade the global economy is

expected to grow at three times the rate of the U.S.
economy. Growth will be particularly powerful in
many emerging markets. If we do not seize these
opportunities, our competitors surely will. We must
continue working hard to secure and enforce
agreements that protect intellectual property rights
and enable Americans to compete fairly in foreign
markets.

Trade agreement implementing authority is essential
for advancing our nation’s economic interests. Con-
gress has consistently recognized that the President
must have the authority to break down foreign trade
barriers and create good jobs. Accordingly, the
Administration will work with Congress to fashion an
appropriate grant of fast track authority.

The Administration will continue to press our trading
partners—multilaterally, regionally and bilaterally—to

expand export opportunities for U.S. workers, farmers

and companies. We will position ourselves at the
center of a constellation of trade relationships—such
as the World Trade Organization, APEC, the

Transatlantic Marketplace and the Free Trade Area of

the Americas (FTAA). We will seek to negotiate
agreements, especially in sectors where the U.S. is
most competitive—as we did in the Information

Technology Agreement and the World Trade
Organization (WTO) Financial Services and
Telecommunications Services Agreements. As we
look ahead to the next WTO Ministerial meeting, to
be held in the United States in late 1999, we will
aggressively pursue an agenda that addresses U.S.
trade objectives. We will also remain vigilant in
enforcing the trade agreements reached with our
trading partners. That is why the U.S. Trade
Representative and the Department of Commerce
created offices in 1996 dedicated to ensuring foreign
governments are fully implementing their
commitments under these agreements.

Promoting an Open Trading
System

The successful conclusion of the Uruguay Round of
negotiations under the General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade significantly strengthened the world trading
system. The U.S. economy is expected to gain over
$100 billion per year in GDP once the Uruguay Round
is fully implemented. The Administration remains
committed to carrying forward the success of the
Uruguay Round and to the success of the WTO as a
forum for openly resolving disputes.

We have completed the Information Technology
Agreement (ITA) which goes far toward eliminating
tariffs on high technology products and amounts to a

29

global annual tax cut of $5 billion. We look to
complete the first agreement expanding products
covered by the ITA in 1998. We also concluded a
landmark WTO agreement that will dramatically
liberalize world trade in telecommunications services.
Under this agreement, covering over 99 percent of
WTO member telecommunications revenues, a
decades old tradition of telecommunications
monopolies and closed markets will give way to
market opening deregulation and competition-
principles championed by the United States.

The WTO agenda includes further negotiations to
reform agricultural trade, liberalize service sector
markets, and strengthen protection for intellectual
property rights. At the May 1998 WTO Ministerial,
members agreed to initiate preparations for these
negotiations and to consider other possible
negotiating topics, including issues not currently
covered by WTO rules. These preparatory talks will
continue over the course of the next year so that the
next round of negotiations can be launched at the
1999 WTO ministerial meeting in the United States.

We also have a full agenda of accession negotiations
with countries seeking to join the WTO. As always,
the United States is setting high standards for
accession in terms of adherence to the rules and
market access. Accessions offer an opportunity to
help ground new economies in the rules-based
trading system and reinforce their own reform
programs. This is why we will take an active role in
the accession process dealing with the 32 applicants
currently seeking WTO membership.

Through Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD) negotiations of a Multilateral
Agreement on Investment, we are seeking to establish
clear legal standards on expropriation, access to
binding international arbitration for disputes and
unrestricted investment—related transfers across
borders. Also in the OECD, the United States is taking
on issues such as corruption and labor practices that
can distort trade and inhibit U.S. competitiveness. We
seeking to have OECD members outlaw bribery of
foreign officials, eliminate the tax deductibility of foreign
bribes, and promote greater transparency in
government procurement. To date, our efforts on
procurement have been concentrated in the World
Bank and the regional development banks, but our
initiative to pursue an agreement on transparency in
WTO member procurement regimes should make an
additional important contribution. We have also made

30

important strides on labor issues. The WTO has
endorsed the importance of core labor standards
sought by the United States since the Eisenhower
Administration—the right to organize and bargain
collectively, and prohibitions against child labor and
forced labor. We will continue pressing for better
integration of the international core labor standards into
the WTO's work, including through closer WTO
interaction with the International Labor Organization
(ILO).

We continue to ensure that liberalization of trade does
not come at the expense of national security or
environmental protection. For example, the national
security, law enforcement and trade policy
communities worked together to make sure that the
WTO agreement liberalizing global investment in
telecommunications was consistent with U.S. national
security interests. Moreover, our leadership in the
Uruguay Round negotiations led to the incorporation of
environmental provisions into the WTO agreements
and creation of the Committee on Trade and
Environment, where governments continue to pursue
the goal of ensuring that trade and environment
policies are mutually supportive. In addition, with U.S.
leadership, countries participating in the Summit of the
Americas are engaged in sustainable development
initiatives to ensure that economic growth does not
come at the cost of environmental protection.

In May 1998, President Clinton presented to the WTO
a set of proposals to further U.S. international trade
objectives:

- First, that the WTO make further efforts to
eliminate trade barriers and pursue a more open
global trading system in order to spur economic
growth, better jobs, higher incomes, and the free
flow of ideas, information and people.

- Second, that the WTO provide a forum where
business, labor, environmental and consumer
groups can provide regular input to help guide
further evolution of the WTO. The trading system
we build for the 21 st century must ensure that
economic competition does not threaten the
livelihood, health and safety of ordinary families
by eroding environmental and consumer
protection or labor standards.

- Third, that a high—level meeting of trade and
environmental officials be convened to provide
direction for WTO environmental efforts, and that

the WTO and the International Labor
Organization commit to work together to ensure
that open trade raises the standard of living for
workers and respects core labor standards.

- Fourth, that the WTO open its doors to the
scrutiny and participation of the public by taking
every feasible step to bring openness and
accountability to its operations, such as by
opening its dispute settlement hearings to the
public and making the briefs for those hearings
publicly available.

- Fifth, that the nations of the world join the United
States in not imposing any tariffs on electronic
commercial transmissions sent across national
borders. The revolution in information technology
represented by the Internet is the greatest force
for prosperity in our lifetimes; we cannot allow
discriminatory barriers to stunt the development
of this promising new economic opportunity. An
electronic commerce work program was agreed
to at the May 1998 WTO Ministerial. It will be
reviewed at the 1999 ministerial meeting.

- Sixth, that all WTO members make government
purchases through open and fair bidding and
adopt the OECD antibribery convention.
Prosperity depends upon government practices
that are based upon the rule of law rather than
bureaucratic caprice, cronyism or corruption.

- Seventh, that the WTO explore a faster trade
negotiating process and develop an open trading
system that can change as fast as the global
marketplace. Positive steps include annual tariff
and subsidy reductions in agriculture, greater
openness and com petition in the services sector,
further tariff reductions in the industrial sector,
and stronger intellectual property protection.

Export Strategy and Advocacy
Program

The Administration created America’s first national
export strategy, reforming the way government works
with the private sector to expand exports. The new
Trade Promotion Coordination Committee (TPCC) has
been instrumental in improving export promotion
efforts, coordinating our export financing, implementing
a government—wide advocacy initiative and updating

market information systems and product standards
education.

The export strategy is working, with the United States
regaining its position as the world’s largest exporter.
While our strong export performance has supported
millions of new, export—related jobs, we must export
more in the years ahead if we are to further strengthen
our trade balance position and raise living standards
with high—wage jobs. Our objective remains to expand
U.S. exports to over $1 .2 trillion by the year 2000,
which will mean over 2.5 million new American jobs
and a total of over 14.6 million jobs supported by
exports.

Enhanced Export Control

The United States is a world leader in high technology
exports, including satellites, cellular phones,
computers and commercial aircraft. Some of this
technology has direct or indirect military applications.
For that reason, the United States government
carefully controls high technology exports through a
licensing process involving the Department of
Defense, the Department of State, the Commerce
Department and other agencies. Changes to U.S.
export controls over the last decade have allowed
America's most important growth industries to
compete effectively overseas and create good jobs at
home while ensuring that proper safeguards are in
place to protect important national security interests.

The cornerstone of our export control policy is
protection of our national security; but imposing the
tightest possible restrictions on high technology
exports is not always the best way to protect our
security. In an increasingly competitive global
economy, the United States retains a monopoly over
very few technologies. As a result, rigid export
controls increasingly would not protect our national
security because the same products can be obtained
readily from foreign sources. Rigid controls would
make U.S. high technology companies less competi-
tive globally, thus losing market share and becoming
less able to produce the innovative, cutting—edge
products for the U.S. military and our allies.

Our current policy—developed in the Reagan and
Bush Administrations and continued by President
Clinton—recognizes that we must balance a variety of
factors. In the wake of the Cold War, the Bush
Administration accelerated the process of moving the

licensing of essentially commercial items from the
State Department’s Munitions List to the Commerce-
administered Commodity Control List in order to
promote high technology exports by making license
decisions more predictable and timely. In 1995, by
Executive Order, President Clinton expanded the right
of the Departments of Defense, State and Energy and
the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency to fully
participate in the decision—making process.
Previously, these agencies reviewed only certain
dual-use applications; as a result of the Executive
Order, they have the right to review every dual-use
application. If any of these agencies disagree with a
proposed export, it can block the license and put the
issue into a dispute resolution process that can
ultimately rise to the President. As a result, reviews
of dual—use licenses are today more thorough and
broadly based than ever before.

While our export controls and the regulations that
implement them have become easier for American
exporters to follow, we have also enhanced our ability
to identify, stop and prosecute those who attempt to
evade them. For example, in fiscal year 1997 efforts
of the Commerce Department's criminal investigators
led to over $1 million in criminal fines and over $16
million in civil penalties. We have significant
enforcement weapons to use against those who
would evade our export controls, and we are using
them vigorously.

Finally, U.S. efforts to stem proliferation cannot be
effective without the cooperation of other countries.
To that end, we have strengthened multilateral
cooperation through the Nuclear Suppliers Group, the
Missile Technology Control Regime, the Australia
Group (for the control of chemical and biological
weapons-related related items), the Chemical
Weapons Convention, and the Wassenaar
Arrangement, which through U.S. leadership is
shaping multilateral export controls for the next
century. These multilateral efforts enlist the world
community in the battle against the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction, advanced conventional
weapons and sensitive technologies, while at the
same time producing a level playing field for U.S.
business by ensuring that our competitors face
corresponding export controls.

Providing for Energy Security

32

The United States depends on oil for about 40 percent
of its primary energy needs and roughly half of our oil
needs are met with imports. Although we import less
than 10% of Persian Gulf exports, our allies in Europe
and Japan account for about 85% of these exports,
thus underscoring the continued strategic importance
of the region. We are undergoing a fundamental shift
away from reliance on Middle East oil. Venezuela is
our number one foreign supplier and Africa supplies
15% of our imported oil. Canada, Mexico and
Venezuela combined supply more than twice as much
oil to the United States as the Arab OPEC countries.

The Caspian Basin, with potential oil reserves of 160
billion barrels, promises to play an increasingly
important role in meeting rising world energy demand
in coming decades. We have made it a priority to work
with the countries of the region to develop multiple
pipeline ventures that will ensure access to the oil. We
are also working on several fronts to enhance the
stability and safeguard the independence of these
nations. While these developments are significant, we
must remember that the vast majority of proven oil
reserves lie in the Middle East and that the global oil
market is largely interdependent.

Conservation measures and research leading to
great—er energy efficiency and alternative fuels are a
critical element of the U.S. strategy for energy
security. The U.S. economy has grown roughly 75
percent since the first oil shock in 1973. During that
time U.S. oil consumption remained virtually stable,
reflecting conservation efforts and increased energy
efficiency. Our research must continue to focus on
developing highly efficient transportation systems and
to shift them to alternative fuels, such as hydrogen,
ethanol or methanol from biomass, and others. This
research will also help address concerns about
climate change by providing new approaches for
meeting guidelines on emission of greenhouse gases.
Over the longer term, U.S. dependence on access to
foreign oil sources may be increasingly important as
domestic resources are depleted. Although U.S. oil
consumption has been essentially level since 1973, our
reliance on imported oil has increased due to a decline
in domestic production. Domestic oil production
declined during that period because oil prices were not
high enough to generate new oil exploration sufficient
to sustain production levels from our depleted resource
base. Conservation and energy research
notwithstand—ing, the United States will continue to
have a vital interest in ensuring access to foreign oil
sources. We must continue to be mindful of the need

for regional stability and security in key producing areas
to ensure our access to and the free flow of these
resources.

Promoting Sustainable
Development Abroad

Environmental and natural resource issues can
impede sustainable development efforts and promote
regional instability. Many nations are struggling to
provide jobs, education and other services to their
citizens. The continuing poverty of a quarter of the
world’s people leads to hunger, malnutrition, economic
migration and political unrest. Malaria, AIDS and other
epidemics, including some that can spread through
environmental damage, threaten to overwhelm the
health facilities of developing countries, disrupt
societies and stop economic growth.

Sustainable development improves the prospects for
democracy in developing countries and expands the
demand for U.S. exports. It alleviates pressure on
the global environment, reduces the attraction of the
illegal drug trade and other illicit commerce, and
improves health and economic productivity. U.S.
foreign assistance focuses on four key elements of
sustainable development: broad—based economic
growth, environmental security, population and
health, and democracy.

We will continue to advocate environmentally sound
private investment and responsible approaches by
international lenders. The multilateral development
banks are now placing increased emphasis upon
sustainable development in their funding decisions,
including assisting borrowing countries to better
manage their economies. The U.S. Initiative on Joint
Implementation, part of the Administration's Climate
Change Action Plan, encourages U.S. businesses and
nongovernmental organizations to apply innovative
technologies and practices to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions and promote sustainable development
abroad. The initiative, which includes 32 projects in 12
countries, has proven effective in transferring
technology for environmentally sound, sustainable
development. The Global Environmental Facility
provides a source of financial assistance to the
developing world for climate change, biodiversity and
oceans initiatives that will benefit all the world’s
citizens. Environmental damage in countries of the

NIS and Central and Eastern Europe continues to
impede their ability to emerge as

prosperous, independent countries. We are focusing
technical assistance and encouraging non-
governmental environmental groups to provide
expertise to the NIS and Central and Eastern European
nations that have suffered the most acute
environmental crises.

Promoting Democracy

The third core objective of our national security
strategy is to promote democracy and human rights.
The number of states moving away from repressive
governance toward democratic and publicly
accountable institutions is impressive. Since the
success of many of those changes is by no means
assured, our strategy must focus on strengthening their
commitment and institutional capacity to implement
democratic reforms.

Emerging Democracies

We seek international support in helping strengthen
democratic and free market institutions and norms in
countries making the transition from closed to open
societies. This commitment to see freedom and
respect for human rights take hold is not onlyjust, but
pragmatic, for strengthened democratic institutions
benefit the United States and the world.

The United States is helping consolidate democratic
and market reforms in Central and Eastern Europe
and the NIS. Integrating the Central and Eastern
European nations into European security and
economic organizations, such as NATO and the EU,
will help lock in and preserve the impressive progress
these nations have made in instituting democratic and
market—economic reforms. Our intensified interaction
with Ukraine has helped move that country onto the
path of economic reform, which is critical to its long-
term stability. In addition, our efforts in Russia, Ukraine
and the other NIS facilitate our goal of achieving
continued reductions in nuclear arms and compliance
with international nonproliferation accords.

Continuing advances in democracy and free markets in
our own hemisphere remain a priority, as reflected by
the President’s 1997 trips to Latin America and the
Caribbean and the Summit of the Americas in Santiago
this year. In the Asia Pacific region, economic

33

dynamism is increasingly associated with political
modernization, democratic evolution and the widening
of the rule of law—and it has global impacts. We are
particularly attentive to states whose entry into the
camp of market democracies may influence the future
direction of an entire region; South Africa now holds
that potential with regard to sub—Saharan Africa.

The methods for assisting emerging democracies are
as varied as the nations involved. We must continue
leading efforts to mobilize international economic and
political resources, as we have with Russia, Ukraine
and the other NIS. We must take firm action to help
counter attempts to reverse democracy, as we have in
Haiti and Paraguay. We must give democratic nations
the fullest benefits of integration into foreign markets,
which is part of the reason NAFTA and the Uruguay
Round of GATT ranked so high on our agenda and
why we are now working to forge the FTAA. We must
help these nations strengthen the pillars of civil society,
supporting administration of justice and rule of law
programs, assisting the development of democratic
civil—military relations, and training foreign police and
security forces to solve crimes and maintain order
without violating the basic rights of their citizens. And
we must seek to improve their market institutions and
fight corruption and political discontent by encouraging
good governance practices.

Adherence to Universal Human
Rights and Democratic Principles

We must sustain our efforts to press for political
liberalization and respect for basic human rights
worldwide, including in countries that continue to defy
democratic advances. Working bilaterally and
through multilateral institutions, the United States
promotes universal adherence to international human
rights and democratic principles. Our efforts in the
United Nations and other organizations are helping to
make these principles the governing standards for
acceptable international behavior.

We will also continue to work—bilaterally and with
multilateral institutions—to ensure that international
human rights principles protect the most vulnerable or
traditionally oppressed groups in the world—women,
children, workers, refugees and persons persecuted
on the basis of their religious beliefs or ethnic
descent. To this end, we will seek to strength—en and
improve the UN Human Rights Commission and other
international mechanisms that promote human rights

34

and address violations of international humanitarian
law, such as the international war crimes tribunals for
the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda.

To focus additional attention on the more vulnerable or
traditionally oppressed people, we seek to spearhead
new international initiatives to combat the sexual
exploitation of minors, child labor, homelessness
among children, violence against women and children,
and female genital mutilation. We will continue to
work with individual nations, such as Russia and
China, and with international institutions to combat
religious persecution. We are encouraging
governments to not return people to countries where
they face persecution. We ask that they provide
asylum or offer temporary protection to persons
fleeing situations of conflict or generalized human
rights abuses. We seek to ensure that such persons
are not returned without due consideration of their
need for permanent protection.

Violence against women and trafficking in women and
girls is are international problem with national
implications. We have seen cases of trafficking in the
United States for purposes of forced prostitution,
sweatshop labor and domestic servitude. The United
States is committed to combating trafficking in
women and girls with a focus on the areas of
prevention, victim assistance and protection, and
enforcement. On March 11, 1998, President Clinton
directed a wide range of expanded efforts to com bat
violence against women in the United States and
around the world, including efforts to increase
national and international awareness of trafficking in
women and girls. The President called for continued
efforts to fully implement the 1994 Violence Against
Women Act and restore its protection for immigrant
victims of domestic violence in the United States so
that they will not be forced to choose between
deportation and abuse. He also called upon the
Senate to give its advice and consent to ratification to
the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of
Discrimination Against Women, which will enhance
our efforts to com bat violence against women, reform
unfair inheritance and property rights, and strengthen
women's access to fair employment and economic
opportunity.

The United States will continue to speak out against
human rights abuses and carry on human rights
dialogues with countries willing to engage us
constructively. Because police and internal security
services can be a source of human rights violations,

we use training and contacts between U.S. law
enforcement and their foreign counterparts to help
address these problems. Federal law enforcement
agents can serve as role models for investigators in
countries where the police have been instruments of
oppression and at the same time reduce international
crime and terrorism that affects U.S. interests. In
appropriate circumstances, we must be prepared to
take strong measures against human rights violators.
These include economic sanctions, as have been
maintained against Nigeria, Iraq, Burma, North Korea
and Cuba, visa restrictions and restricting sales of
arms and police equipment that may be used to
commit human rights abuses.

Humanitarian Activities

Our efforts to promote democracy and human rights
are complemented by our humanitarian programs,

which are designed to alleviate human suffering, help
establish democratic regimes that respect human
rights and pursue appropriate strategies for economic
development. These efforts also enable the United
States to help prevent humanitarian disasters with far
more significant resource implications.

We also must seek to promote reconciliation in states
experiencing civil conflict and to address migration and
refugee crises. To this end, the United States will
provide appropriate financial support and work with
other nations and international bodies, such as the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the UN
High Commissioner for Refugees. We also will assist
efforts to protect the rights of refugees and displaced
persons and to address the economic and social root
causes of internal displacement and international
flight. Finally, we will cooperate with other states to
curb illegal immigration into this country.

Private firms and associations are natural allies in
activities and efforts intended to bolster market
economies. We have natural partners in labor unions,
human rights groups, environmental advocates,
chambers of commerce and election monitors in
promoting democracy and respect for human rights
and in providing international humanitarian
assistance; thus, we should promote democratization
efforts through private and nongovernmental groups
as well as foreign governments.

Supporting the global movement toward democracy
requires a pragmatic, long-term effort focused on both
values and institutions. Our goal is a broadening of the
community of free-market democracies and stronger
international nongovernmental movements committed
to human rights and democratization.

35

Ill. Integrated Regional Approaches

Our policies toward different regions reflect our overall
strategy tailored to unique challenges and
opportunities.

Europe and Eurasia

European stability is vital to our own security. The
United States has two strategic goals in Europe. The
first is to build a Europe that is truly integrated,
democratic, prosperous and at peace. This would
complete the mission the United States launched 50
years ago with the Marshall Plan and the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO).

Our second goal is to work with our allies and
partners across the Atlantic to meet the global
challenges no nation can meet alone. This means
working together to support peace efforts in troubled
regions, to counter global threats such as the spread
of weapons of mass destruction and dual-use
technology, and to build a more open world economy
and without barriers to transatlantic trade and
investment. We will continue to strengthen the
OSCE’s role in conflict prevention and crisis
management and seek closer cooperation with our
European partners in dealing with non-military
security threats through our New Transatlantic
Agenda with the European Union (EU).

Enhancing Security

NATO remains the anchor of American engagement
in Europe and the linchpin of transatlantic security.
As a guarantor of European security and a force for
European stability, NATO must play a leading role in
promoting a more integrated and secure Europe,
prepared to respond to new challenges. We will
maintain approximately 100,000 military personnel in
Europe to fulfill our commitments to NATO, provide a
visible deterrent against aggression and coercion,
contribute to regional stability, respond to crises,

sustain our vital transatlantic ties and preserve U.S.
leadership in NATO.

NATO enlargement is a crucial element of the U.S.
and Allied strategy to build an undivided, peaceful
Europe. The end of the Cold War changed the
nature of the threats to this region, but not the fact
that Europe's stability is vital to our own national
security. The addition of well—qualified democracies,
which have demonstrated their commitment to the
values of freedom and the security of the broader
region, will help deter potential threats to Europe,
deepen the continent's stability, bolster its democratic
advances, erase its artificial divisions, and strengthen
an Alliance that has proven its effectiveness both
during and since the Cold War.

In December 1997, the NATO foreign ministers
signed the three protocols of accession for Poland,
Hungary, and the Czech Republic, making them full
members of the Alliance subject to ratification by all
current and incoming NATO members. On May 21,
1998, the President signed the instruments of
ratification for the three protocols following a strong,
bipartisan 80-19 vote of approval in the U.S. Senate.
Poland, Hungary, and the Czech Republic will make
the Alliance stronger while helping to enlarge
Europe's zone of democratic stability. They have
been leaders in Central Europe's dramatic
transformation over the past decade and have helped
make Central Europe the continent's most robust
zone of economic growth. They will strengthen
NATO through the addition of military resources,
strategic depth and the prospect of greater stability in
Europe's central region. Our Alliance with them will
improve our ability to protect and advance our
interests in the transatlantic area and contribute to
our security in the years to come.

At the same time, we have vigorously pursued efforts
to help other countries that aspire to membership
become the best possible candidates. Together with
our Allies we are enhancing the Partnership for
Peace and continuing political contacts with aspiring

37

states. We are also continuing bilateral programs to
advance this agenda, such as the President’s
Warsaw Initiative, which is playing a critical role in
helping the militaries of Central and Eastern Europe
and Eurasia become more interoperable with NATO.
Building on the increasing links between NATO and
the Partnership for Peace nations, Partners will
increasingly contribute to real—world NATO missions,
as many are doing in the NATO—led operation in
Bosnia.

Some European nations do not desire NATO
membership, but do desire strengthened ties with the
Alliance. The Partnership for Peace provides an
ideal venue for such relationships. It formalizes
relations, provides a mechanism for mutual beneficial
interaction and establishes a sound basis for
combined action should that be desired. For all these
reasons, Partnership for Peace will remain a central
and permanent part of the European security
architecture.

NATO also is pursuing several other initiatives to
enhance its ability to respond to new challenges and
deepen ties between the Alliance and Partner
countries. NATO has launched the Euro—Atlantic
Partnership Council to strengthen political dialogue
and practical cooperation with all Partners, and
established a NATO—Ukraine Charter, which provides
a framework for enhanced relations. As a result of
the 1997 NATO—Russia Founding Act, NATO and
Russia developed the Permanent Joint Council to
enhance political consultation and practical
cooperation, while retaining NATO's decision—making
authority. Our shared goal remains constructive
Russian participation in the European security
system.

The North Atlantic Treaty Organization will hold its
Fiftieth Anniversary summit meeting in Washington
on April 24-25, 1999. This summit will mark NATO's
extraordinary record of success over the past fifty
years in protecting the security of the United States
and our European allies. As agreed at the 1997
Madrid summit, we hope to use the upcoming summit
meeting in Washington to welcome the entry of
Poland, Hungary, and the Czech Republic as new
members of the alliance. Looking to the future, the
summit will advance the common work of NATO
allies and partners to build an undivided Europe that
is peaceful, prosperous, and democratic.

38

As we help build a comprehensive European security
architecture, we must continue to focus on regional
security challenges.

Southeastern Europe and the Balkans: There are
significant security challenges in Southeastern Europe.
Instability in this region could threaten the
consolidation of reforms, disrupt commerce and
undermine our efforts to bring peace to Bosnia and
other parts of the former Yugoslavia.

The United States has an abiding interest in peace
and stability in Bosnia because continued war in that
region threatens all of Europe’s stability. Implemen-
tation of the Dayton Accords is the best hope for
creating a self—sustaining peace in Bosnia. NATO—led
forces are contributing to a secure environment in
Bosnia and providing essential support for the
broader progress we are making in implementing the
Dayton Accords. Further progress is necessary,
however, to create conditions that will allow
implementation to continue without a large military
presence. We are committed to full implementation
of the Dayton Accords and success in Bosnia. We
support the efforts of the International Criminal Tribunal
for the former Yugoslavia and broader efforts to
promote justice and reconciliation in Bosnia.

We are deeply concerned about the ongoing
bloodshed in Kosovo, which threatens security and
stability throughout the Balkan region. We are firmly
convinced that the problems in Kosovo can best be
resolved through a process of open and
unconditional dialogue between authorities in
Belgrade and the Kosovar Albanian leadership. We
seek a peaceful resolution of the crisis that
guarantees restoration of human and political rights
which have been systematically denied the Kosovar
Albanian population since Belgrade withdrew
autonomy in 1989. In support of that objective,
NATO is reviewing options for deterring further
violence against the civilian population in Kosovo and
stabilizing the military situation in the region.

We are redoubling our efforts to advance the
integration of several new democracies in
Southeastern Europe (Bulgaria, Romania, Slovenia
and the Former Yugoslavian Republic of Macedonia)
into the European mainstream. More specifically, the
President's Action Plan for Southeast Europe seeks
to promote further democratic, economic, and military

reforms in these countries, to encourage greater
regional cooperation, and to advance common
interests, such as closer contact with NATO, and
increased law enforcement training and exchanges to
assist in the fight against organized crime.

Tensions on Cyprus, Greek—Turkish disagreements in
the Aegean and Turkey’s relationship with the EU have
serious implications for regional stability and the
evolution of European political and security structures.
Our goals are to stabilize the region by reducing long-
standing Greek-Turkish tensions and pursuing a
comprehensive settlement on Cyprus. A democratic,
secular, stable and Western—oriented Turkey is critical
to these efforts and has supported broader U.S. efforts
to enhance stability in Bosnia, the NIS and the Middle
East, as well as to contain Iran and Iraq.

The Baltic States: For over fifty years, the United
States has recognized the sovereignty and
independence of the republics of Estonia, Latvia and
Lithuania. During this period, we never
acknowledged their forced incorporation into the
Soviet Union. The special nature of our relationship
with the Baltic States is recognized in the Charter of
Partnership signed on January 16, 1998, which
clarifies the principles upon which U.S. relations with
the Baltic states are based and provides a framework
for strengthening ties and pursuing common goals.
These goals include integration of Latvia, Lithuania
and Estonia into the transatlantic community and
development of close, cooperative relationships
among all the states in Northeastern Europe. The
Charter also establishes mechanisms for high—level
review and adjustment of this cooperation.

Northern Ireland: After a 30-year winter of sectarian
violence, Northern Ireland has the promise of a
springtime of peace. The agreement that emerged
from the Northern Ireland peace talks on April 10,
1998 opened the way to build a society based on
enduring peace, justice and equality. On May 22,
1998, the people of Ireland and Northern Ireland
seized this opportunity to turn the common tragedy of
Northern Ireland's past into a shared triumph for the
future by strongly endorsing the peace accord. In so
doing, they have written a new chapter in the rich
history of their island by creating the best chance for
peace in a generation.

The United States actively promoted this peace
process and will continue to stand with those who

seek to build lasting peace and enduring prosperity in
Ireland and Northern Ireland. They can count on the
continuing aid, support and encouragement of the
United States. The task of making the peace endure
will be difficult. Some may seek to undermine this
agreement by returning to violence. Anyone who
does so, from whatever side and whatever faction,
will have no friends in America. We will work closely
with British and Irish law enforcement and
intelligence officials to prevent outrages before they
happen by identifying terrorists and their sources of
financial and material support.

We will continue to work with Northern Ireland’s
leaders as they seek to transform the promise of the
Accord into a reality—with new democratic
institutions and new economic opportunities for all of
Northern Ireland’s people. Working through the
International Fund for Ireland and the private sector,
we will help the people seize the opportunities that
peace will bring to attract new investment to create
new factories, workplaces and jobs, and establish
new centers of learning to prepare for the 21st
Century.

Newly Independent States (NIS): The United States
is pursuing a wide range of security objectives in the
NIS. We seek to bring Russia, Ukraine and the other
NIS into a new, cooperative European security order,
which includes strengthening their participation in
NATO Partnership for Peace activities and building
effective NATO—Russia and NATO—Ukraine
partnerships. We seek to reduce the threat of nuclear
war and the spread of nuclear weapons and materials,
as well as other weapons of mass destruction and their
delivery systems, especially to outlaw states.

The United States has vital security interests in the
evolution of Russia, Ukraine and the other NIS into
democratic market economies, peacefully and
prosperously integrated into the world community. The
governmental and financial sectors in this region
appear especially susceptible to penetration by
organized criminal groups, who have the ability to
subvert and destroy these nascent institutions.
Further democratic and economic reforms and
integration into the WTO and other international
economic institutions will strengthen the rule of law and
respect for human rights, foster growth by expanding
private sector activity, and encourage open and
cooperative policies toward the global community.

39

Promoting Prosperity

Europe is a key element in America’s global
commercial engagement. Europe and the United
States produce over half of all global goods and
services. More than 60% of total U.S. investment
abroad is in Europe and fourteen million workers on
both sides of the Atlantic earn their livelihoods directly
from transatlantic commerce. As part of the New
Transatlantic Agenda launched at the 1995 U.S.—EU
Summit in Madrid, the United States and the EU
agreed to take concrete steps to reduce barriers to
trade and investment through the creation of an open
New Transatlantic Marketplace. We have concluded
Mutual Recognition Agreements eliminating redundant
testing and certification requirements covering $50
billion in two—way trade. Our governments are also
cooperating closely with the Transatlantic Business
Dialogue, a U.S.-European business partnership, to
address a wide range of trade barriers.

Building on the New Transatlantic Agenda, the United
States and the EU launched the Transatlantic
Economic Partnership on May 18, 1998. This is a
major new initiative to deepen our economic
relations, reinforce our political ties and reduce trade
frictions that have plagued our bilateral relationship.
The first element of the initiative is reducing barriers
that affect manufacturing, agriculture and services.

In the manufacturing area we will focus on standards
and technical barriers that American businesses have
identified as the most significant obstacle to
expanding trade. In the agricultural area we will
focus on regulatory barriers that have inhibited the
expansion of agriculture trade, particularly in the
biotechnology area. In the area of services we will
seek to open our markets further and to create new
opportunities for the number of service industries that
are so active in the European market.

The second element of the Transatlantic Economic
Partnership is a broader, cooperative approach to
addressing a wide range of trade issues. We agreed
to maintain current practices, and will continue not
imposing duties on electronic transmissions and
develop a work program in the WTO for electronic
commerce. We will seek to adopt common positions
and effective strategies for accelerating compliance
with WTO commitments on intellectual property. We
will seek to promote government procurement
opportunities, including promoting compatibility of
electronic procurement information and government

40

contracting systems. We will seek innovative ways to
promote our shared labor and environmental values
around the world. To promote fair competition, we
will seek to enhance the compatibility of our
procedures with potentially significant reductions in
cost for American companies.

The United States strongly supports the process of
European integration embodied in the EU. We are also
encouraging bilateral trade and investment in non—EU
countries and supporting enlargement of the EU. We
recognize that EU nations face significant economic
challenges with nearly 20 million people unemployed,
and that economic stagnation has eroded public
support for funding outward—looking foreign policies
and greater integration. We are working closely with
our European partners to expand employment,
promote long-term growth and support the New
Transatlantic Agenda.

By supporting historic market reforms in Central and
Eastern Europe and in the NIS, we both strengthen
our own economy and help new democracies take
root. Poland, economically troubled as recently as
1989, now symbolizes the new dynamism and rapid
growth that extensive, free-market reforms make
possible. Recent economic turbulence in Russia
demonstrates that the transition to a more
prosperous, market—based economy will be a long-
term process characterized by promise and
disappointment. In Ukraine, reinvigorating economic
reform remains a key challenge to strengthening
national security and independence. Much remains
to be done throughout the region to assure
sustainable economic recoveries and adequate social
protection.

The United States will continue helping the NIS
economies integrate into international economic and
other institutions and develop healthy business
climates. We will continue to mobilize the
international community to provide assistance to
support reform. The United States is working closely
with Russia and Ukraine in priority areas, including
defense conversion, the environment, trade and
investment, and scientific and technological
cooperation. We are also encouraging investment,
especially by U.S. companies, in NIS energy resources
and their export to world markets, thereby expanding
and diversifying world energy supplies and promoting
prosperity in the NIS.

Ultimately, the success of economic and financial
reforms in the countries recently emerged from
communism will depend more on private investment
than official aid. One of our priorities, therefore, is to
help countries stimulate foreign and domestic
investment. At the Helsinki Summit, Presidents
Clinton and Yeltsin defined an ambitious reform
agenda covering key tax, energy and commercial
laws crucial for Russia to realize its potential for
attracting foreign investment. Further, the Presidents
outlined steps to accelerate Russian membership on
commercial terms in key economic organizations
such as the WTO. It is in both Russia’s interest and
ours that we work with Russian leaders on passage
of key economic and commercial legislation. We are
cooperating with Russia to facilitate oil and gas
exports to and through Russia from neighboring
Caspian countries. We also support development of
new East—West oil and gas export routes across the
Caspian Sea and through the Transcaucasus and
Turkey.

Ukraine is at an important point in its economic
transition—one that will affect its integration with
Europe and domestic prosperity. The United States
has mobilized the international community’s support
for Ukrainian economic reform, pushed to improve
Ukraine’s investment climate, and championed its
integration into key European, transatlantic and
global economic institutions. Two other challenges
stand out: first, to instill respect for the rule of law so
that a more transparent, level economic playing field
is established and democratic governance prevails;
and, second, to gain international support as it seeks
to close down Chernobyl and reform its energy
sector. The U.S.—Ukraine Binational Commission,
chaired by Vice President Gore and President
Kuchma, serves as a focal point to coordinate
bilateral relations and to invigorate Ukrainian reform
efforts.

A stable and prosperous Caucasus and Central Asia
will help promote stability and security from the
Mediterranean to China and facilitate rapid develop-
ment and transport to international markets of the
large Caspian oil and gas resources, with substantial
U.S. commercial participation. While the new states
in the region have made progress in their quest for
sovereignty and a secure place in the international
arena, much remains to be done in democratic and
economic reform and in settling regional conflicts,
such as Nagorno—Karabakh and Abkhazia.

Promoting Democracy

Thoroughgoing democratic and economic reforms in
the NIS and Europe’s former communist states are the
best measures to avert conditions which could foster
aggressive nationalism and ethnic hatreds. Already,
the prospect of joining or rejoining the Western
democratic family has dampened the forces of
nationalism and strengthened the forces of democracy
and reform in many countries of the region.

The independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity, and
democratic and economic reform of the NIS are
important to American interests. To advance these
goals, we are utilizing our bilateral relationships, our
leadership of international institutions, and billions of
dollars in private and multilateral resources. But the
circumstances affecting the smaller countries depend
in significant measure on the fate of reform in the
largest and most powerful—Russia. The United States
will continue vigorouslyto promote Russian reform and
international integration, and discourage any reversal in
the progress that has been made. Our economic and
political support for the Russian government depends
on its commitment to internal reform and a responsible
foreign policy.

East Asia and the Pacific

President Clinton’s vision of a new Pacific community
links security interests with economic growth and our
commitment to democracy and human rights. We
continue to build on that vision, cementing America’s
role as a stabilizing force in a more integrated Asia
Pacific region.

Enhancing Security

Our military presence has been essential to
maintaining the stability that has enabled most nations
in the Asia Pacific region to build thriving economies for
the benefit of all. To deter aggression and secure our
own interests, we will maintain approximately 100,000
U.S. military personnel in the region. Our commitment
to maintaining an active military presence in the region
and our treaty alliances with Japan, South Korea,
Australia, Thailand and the Philippines serve as the
foundation for America’s continuing security role.

We are maintaining healthy relations with the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
which now includes Singapore, Malaysia, Thailand,
Indonesia, the Philippines, Brunei, Vietnam, Laos and
Burma. We are also supporting regional dialogue-
such as in the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF)—on
the full range of common security challenges. By
meeting on confidence—building measures such as
search and rescue cooperation and peacekeeping, the
ARF can help enhance regional security and
understanding.

Japan

The United States and Japan reaffirmed our bilateral
security relationship in the April 1996 Joint Security
Declaration. The alliance continues to be the
cornerstone for achieving common security
objectives and for maintaining a stable and
prosperous environment for the Asia Pacific region as
we enter the twenty—first century. In September
1997, both Governments issued the revised
Guidelines for U.S.—Japan Defense Cooperation
which will result in greater bilateral cooperation in
peacekeeping and humanitarian relief operations, in
situations in areas surrounding Japan, and in the
defense of Japan itself. The revised Guidelines, like
the U.S.—Japan security relationship itself, are not
directed against any other country.

In April 1998, in order to support the new Guidelines,
both governments agreed to a revised Acquisition
and Cross—Servicing Agreement (ACSA) which
expands the exchange of provision of supplies and
services to include reciprocal provision of logistics
support during situations surrounding Japan that
have an important influence on Japan’s peace and
security. While the guidelines and its related efforts
have specifically focused on regional security, both
countries have continued to cooperate in the
implementation of the Special Action Committee on
Okinawa (SACO) Final report. This effort initiated
plans and measures to realign, consolidate, and
reduce U.S. facilities and areas in Okinawa in order
to ease the impact of U.S. Forces’ presence on the
people of Okinawa. Implementation of SACO will
ultimately aid in ensuring the maintenance of U.S.
operational capabilities and force presence in the
Asia-Pacific region.

U.S.—Japan security cooperation extends to
promoting regional peace and stability, seeking

42

universal adherence to the Nuclear Non—Proliferation
Treaty, and addressing the dangers posed by
transfers of destabilizing conventional arms and
sensitive dual—use goods and technologies. Our
continued progress in assisting open trade between
our countries and our broad-ranging international
cooperation, exemplified by the Common Agenda,
provide a sound basis for our relations into the next
century.

Korean Peninsula

Tensions on the Korean Peninsula remain the
principal threat to peace and stability in East Asia.
The Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK)
has publicly stated a preference for peaceful
reunification, but continues to dedicate a large portion
of dwindling resources to enhance the combat
capability of its huge military forces. Renewed
conflict has been prevented since 1953 by a
combination of the Armistice Agreement, which
brought an end to open hostilities; the United Nations
Command, which has visibly represented the will of
the UN Security Council to secure peace; and the
physical presence of U.S. and ROK troops in the
Combined Forces Command, which has
demonstrated the alliance’s resolve.

The inauguration of Kim Dae—jung as President of the
Republic of Korea on February 25, 1998 marked an
important turning point on the Korean Peninsula. It
marked the triumph of democracy in South Korea and
the first peaceful transition of power from the ruling
party to an opposition party. It was also a remarkable
triumph for President Kim, who had been denied the
Presidency in 1971 by voter intimidation and fraud,
kidnapped and almost murdered by government
agents, sentenced to death in 1991, imprisoned for
six years and in exile or under house arrest for over
ten years. President Kim personifies the victory of
democracy over dictatorship in South Korea.

President Kim has set a new course toward peace
and stability on the Korean Peninsula by opening
new channels for dialogue and seeking areas for
cooperation between North and South. During their
summit meeting in June 1998, President Clinton and
President Kim discussed the situation on the Korean
Peninsula, reaffirming South Korea's role as lead
interlocutor with the North Koreans and the
importance of our strong defense alliance. President
Clinton expressed strong support for President Kim's

vision of engagement and efforts toward
reconciliation with the North. The United States is
working to create conditions of stability by maintaining
solidarity with our South Korean ally, emphasizing
America’s commitment to shaping a peaceful and
prosperous Korean Peninsula and ensuring that an
isolated and struggling North Korea does not opt for a
military solution to its political and economic problems.

Peaceful resolution of the Korean conflict with a non-
nuclear, reunified peninsula will enhance stability in the
East Asian region and is clearly in our strategic interest.
We are willing to improve bilateral political and
economic ties with North Korea—consistent with the
objectives of our alliance with the ROK—to draw the
North into more normal relations with the region and
the rest of the world. Our willingness to improve
bilateral relations will continue to be commensurate
with the North’s cooperation in efforts to reduce
tensions on the peninsula. South Korea has set a
shining example for nonproliferation by forswearing
nuclear weapons, accepting safeguards, and
developing a peaceful nuclear program that brings
benefits to the region. We are firm that North Korea
must freeze and dismantle its graphite-moderated
reactors and related facilities and fully com ply with its
NPT obligations under the Agreed Framework. We
also seek to cease North Korea's chemical and
biological weapon programs and ballistic missile
proliferation activities. The United States, too, must
fulfill its obligations under the Agreed Framework and
the Administration will work with the Congress to
ensure the success of our efforts to address the North
Korean nuclear threat. The North must also engage in
a productive dialogue with South Korea; continue the
recently revived United Nations Command—Korean
People's Army General Officer Dialogue talks at

Panm unjon; participate constructively in the Four Party
Talks among the United States, China, and North and
South Korea to reduce tensions and negotiate a peace
agreement; and support our efforts to recover the
remains of American servicemen missing since the
Korean War.

China

A stable, open, prosperous People's Republic of
China (PRC) that assumes its responsibilities for
building a more peaceful world is clearly and
profoundly in our interests. The prospects for peace
and prosperity in Asia depend heavily on China’s role
as a responsible member of the international

community. China’s integration into the international
system of rules and norms will influence its own
political and economic development, as well as its
relations with the rest of the world. Our relationship
with China will in large measure help to determine
whether the 21st century is one of security, peace,
and prosperity for the American people. Our success
in working with China as a partner in building a stable
international order depends on establishing a
productive relationship that will build sustained
domestic support.

Our policy toward China is both principled and
pragmatic: expanding our areas of cooperation while
dealing forthrightly with our differences. Seeking to
isolate China is clearly unworkable. Even our friends
and allies around the world would not support us; we
would succeed only in isolating ourselves and our
own policy. More importantly, choosing isolation over
engagement would not make the world safer. It
would make it more dangerous. It would undermine
rather than strengthen our efforts to foster stability in
Asia and halt the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. It would hinder the cause of democracy
and human rights in China, set back worldwide efforts
to protect the environment, and cutoff one of the
world's most important markets.

President Jiang Zemin's visit to the United States in
October 1997—the first state visit by the President of
China to the United States in twelve years—marked
significant progress in the development of U.S.—PRC
relations. President Clinton's reciprocal visit to
Beijing in June 1998—the first state visit by an
American president to China in this decade—further
expanded and strengthened our relations. The two
summits were important milestones toward building a
constructive U.S.—China strategic partnership.

In their 1997 summit, the two Presidents agreed on a
number of steps to strengthen cooperation in
international affairs: establishing a Washington-
Beijing presidential communications link to facilitate
direct contact, regular presidential visits to each
other's capitals, and regular exchanges of visits by
cabinet and sub—cabinet officials to consult on
political, military, security and arms control issues.
They agreed to establish a consultation mechanism
to strengthen military maritime safety—which will
enable their maritime and air forces to avoid
accidents, misunderstandings or miscalculations—
and to hold discussions on humanitarian assistance
and disaster relief. In their June 1998 meeting, they

43

agreed to continue their regular summit meetings and
to intensify the bilateral dialogue on security issues.

Arms control and non—proliferation issues were high
on the agenda for 1998 summit, which expanded and
strengthened the series of agreements that were
reached at the 1997 summit. In Beijing, Presidents
Clinton and Jiang announced that the United States
and China will not target their strategic nuclear
weapons at each other. They confirmed their
common goal to halt the spread of weapons of mass
destruction. We welcomed China’s statement that it
attaches importance to issues related to the Missile
Technology Control Regime (MTCR) and missile
nonproliferation and that it has begun to actively
studyjoining the MTCR. Our two nations will
continue consultations on MTCR issues in 1998.
Both sides agreed to further strengthen controls on
the export of dual—use chemicals and related
production equipment and technology to assure they
are not used for production of chemical weapons,
and China announced that it has expanded the list of
chemical precursors which it controls. The two
Presidents issued a joint statement calling for
strengthening of the Biological Weapons Convention
and early conclusion of a protocol establishing a
practical and effective compliance mechanism and
improving transparency. They issued a joint
statement affirming their commitment to ending the
export and indiscriminate use of anti—personnel
landmines and to accelerating global humanitarian
demining. We also reached agreement with China
on practices for end—use visits on U.S. high
technology exports to China, which will establish a
framework for such exports to China.

China is working with the United States on important
regional security issues. In June 1998, China chaired
a meeting of the permanent members of the UN
Security Council to forge a common strategy for
moving India and Pakistan away from a nuclear arms
race. China condemned both countries for
conducting nuclear tests and joined us in urging them
to conduct no more tests, to sign the Comprehensive
Test Ban Treaty, to avoid deploying or testing
missiles, and to work to resolve their differences
through dialogue. At the 1998 summit, Presidents
Clinton and Jiang issued a joint statement on their
shared interest in a peaceful and stable South Asia
and agreed to continue to coordinate their efforts to
strengthen peace and stability in that region. On the
Korean Peninsula, China has become a force for
peace and stability, helping us to convince North

44

Korea to freeze its dangerous nuclear program,
playing a constructive role in the four—party peace
talks.

The United States and China are working to
strengthen cooperation in the field of law
enforcement and mutual legal assistance, including
efforts to combat international organized crime,
narcotics trafficking, alien smuggling, illegal
immigration, counterfeiting and money laundering.
We have established a joint liaison group for law
enforcement cooperation and assigned
counternarcotics officers to each other’s embassies in
1998.

Our key security objectives for the future include:

- sustaining the strategic dialogue begun by
the recent summits and other high—level
exchanges;

- enhancing stability in the Taiwan Strait
through peaceful approaches to cross—Strait
issues and encouraging dialogue between
Beijing and Taipei;

- strengthening China’s adherence to
international nonproliferation norms,
particularly in its export controls on ballistic
missile and dual use technologies;

- achieving greater openness and
transparency in China’s military;

- encouraging a constructive PRC role in
international affairs through active
cooperation in ARF, the Asia Pacific
Economic Cooperation Forum (APEC) and
the Northeast Asia Security Dialogue; and

- improving law enforcement cooperation with
PRC officials through increased liaison and
training.

Southeast Asia

Our strategic interest in Southeast Asia centers on
developing regional and bilateral security and
economic relationships that assist in conflict
prevention and resolution and expand U.S.
participation in the region’s economies. U.S. security
objectives in the region are to maintain our security

alliances with Australia, Thailand and the Philippines,
to sustain security access arrangements with
Singapore and other ASEAN countries, and to
encourage the emergence of a strong, cohesive
ASEAN capable of enhancing regional stability and
prosperity.

Our policy combines two approaches: First,
maintaining our increasingly productive relationship
with ASEAN—especially our security dialogue under
the ARF. Second, pursuing bilateral initiatives with
individual Southeast Asian nations to promote
political stability, foster market—oriented economic
reforms, and reduce or contain the effects of Asian
organized crime, particularly the flow of heroin from
Burma and other countries in the region.

Promoting Prosperity

A prosperous and open Asia Pacific is key to the
economic health of the United States. On the eve of
the recent financial problems in Asia, the 18
members of APEC contributed about one—half of total
global gross domestic product and exports. Thirty
percent of U.S. exports go to Asia, supporting
millions of U.S. jobs, and we export more to Asia than
Europe. In states like California, Oregon and
Washington, exports to Asia account for more than
half of each state's total exports. U.S. direct
investments in Asia represent about one-fifth of total
U.S. direct foreign investment.

Our economic objectives in East Asia include
recovery from the recent financial crisis, continued
progress within APEC toward liberalizing trade and
investment, increased U.S. exports to Asian countries
through market-opening measures and leveling the
playing field for U.S. business, and WTO accession
for China and Taiwan on satisfactory commercial
terms. Opportunities for economic growth abound in
Asia and underlie our strong commitment to
multilateral economic cooperation, such as via the
annual APEC leaders meetings.

Promoting sustainable development, protecting the
environment and coping with the global problem of
climate change are important for ensuring long-term
prosperity in the Asia Pacific region. The Kyoto
Agreement was a major step forward in controlling
the greenhouse gases that are causing climate
change, but its success depends on meaningful
participation by key developing nations as well as the

industrialized nations of the world. Rapid economic
growth in China and India make their participation
essential to the global effort to control greenhouse
gases.

The Asian Financial Crisis

Over the last decade, the global economy has
entered a new era—an era of interdependence and
opportunity. Americans have benefited greatly from
the worldwide increase of trade and capital flows.
This development has contributed to steady GNP
growth, improvements in standards of living, more
high paying jobs (particularly in export—oriented
industries), and low inflation.

The United States has enormously important
economic and national security interests at stake in
East Asia. Prolonged economic distress and
financial instability will have an adverse effect on U.S.
exports to the region, the competitiveness of
American companies, and the well being of American
workers. There also is a risk that if the current crisis
is left unchecked its effects could spread beyond
East Asia. Simply put, we cannot afford to stand
back in hopes that the crisis will resolve itself. When
we act to help resolve the Asian financial crisis, we
act to protect the well—being of the American people.

In the face of this challenge, our primary objective is
to help stabilize the current financial situation. Our
strategy has four key elements: support for economic
reforms; working with international financial
institutions to provide structural and humanitarian
assistance; providing bilateral humanitarian aid and
contingency bilateral financial assistance if needed;
and urging strong policy actions by Japan and the
other major economic powers to promote global
growth.

We will continue to support South Korea, Thailand
and Indonesia as they implement economic reforms
designed to foster financial stability and investor
confidence in order to attract the capital flows
required to restore economic growth. These reform
programs have at their core restructuring the financial
sector, promoting greater transparency in trade and
investment laws and regulations, and ending policy-
directed lending practices. All three nations face a
difficult road ahead that will test their political will.
The international community can continue to help
ameliorate adverse consequences of the crisis, but

45

only resolute action to keep to the agreed policy
course will bring a resumption of sustained growth.

Although the Asian financial crisis is having a crippling
effect, we believe the underlying fundamentals for
economic recovery are good and are confident that full
and vigorous implementation of economic reforms
combined with the efforts of the international
community will lead to the restoration of economic
growth to the countries of the region. U.S. initiatives in
APEC will open new opportunities for economic
cooperation and permit U.S. companies to expand their
involvement in substantial infrastructure planning and
construction throughout the region. While our progress
in APEC has been gratifying, we will explore options to
encourage all Asia Pacific nations to pursue open
markets.

The United States will continue to work with the IMF,
the World Bank, other international financial
institutions, the governments in East Asia and the
private sector to help stabilize financial markets,
restore investor confidence and achieve much-
needed reforms in the troubled East Asian
economies. Our goal is to help the region recover
quickly and to build a solid, resilient foundation for
future economic growth in the region.

Chma

Bringing the PRC more fully into the global trading
system is manifestly in our national interest. China is
one of the fastest growing markets for our goods and
services. As we look into the next century, our
exports to China will support hundreds of thousands
of jobs across our country. For this reason, we must
continue our normal trade treatment for China, as
every President has done since 1980, strengthening
instead of undermining our economic relationship.

An important part of integrating China into the market-
based world economic system is opening China’s
highly protected market through lower border barriers
and removal of distorting restraints on economic
activity. We have negotiated landmark agreements to
combat piracy of intellectual property and advance the
interests of our creative industries. We have also
negotiated—and vigorously enforced—agreements on
textile trade. At their 1997 and 1998 summits,
President Clinton and President Jiang agreed to take
a number of positive measures to expand U.S.—China
trade and economic ties. We will continue to press

46

China to open its markets (in goods, services and
agriculture) as it engages in sweeping economic
reform.

It is in our interest that China become a member of
the WTO; however, we have been steadfast in
leading the effort to ensure that China’s accession to
the WTO occurs on a commercial basis. China
maintains many barriers that must be eliminated, and
we need to ensure that necessary reforms are
agreed to before accession occurs. At the 1997
summit, the two leaders agreed that China’s full
participation in the multilateral trading system is in
their mutual interest. They agreed to intensify
negotiations on market access, including tariffs, non-
tariff measures, services, standards and agriculture,
and on implementation of WTO principles so that
China can accede to the WTO on a commercial basis
at the earliest possible date. They reiterated their
commitment to this process in their 1998 summit.

China has been a helpful partner in international
efforts to stabilize the Asian financial crisis. In
resisting the temptation to devalue its currency,
China has seen that its own interests lie in preventing
another round of competitive devaluations that would
have severely damaged prospects for regional
recovery. It has also contributed to the rescue
packages for affected economies.

Japan

The Administration continues to make progress on
increasing market access in Asia’s largest economy.
Since the beginning of the first Clinton Administration,
the United States and Japan have reached 35 trade
agreements designed to open Japanese markets in
key sectors, including autos and auto parts,
telecommunications, civil aviation, insurance and
glass. The Administration also has intensified efforts
to monitor and enforce trade agreements with Japan
to ensure that they are fully implemented. The
United States also uses multilateral venues, such as
WTO dispute settlement and negotiation of new
multilateral agreements, to further open markets and
accomplish our trade objectives with Japan.

During the period from 1993 to 1996, U.S. exports to
Japan increased from $47.9 billion to $67.6 billion,
and the bilateral trade deficit fell from $59.4 billion to
$47.6 billion. The recent economic downturn in
Japan, however, has reversed this positive trend with

the bilateral trade deficit for the first four months 1998
already at $20.8 billion, up 32 percent from the same
period in 1996. Sustained global expansion and
recovery in Asia cannot be achieved when the
second largest economy in the world, accounting for
more than half of Asian output, is in recession and
has a weakened financial system.

Japan has a crucial role to play in Asia’s economic
recovery. Japan must generate substantial growth to
help maintain a growing world economy and absorb a
growing share of imports from emerging markets. To
do this Japan must reform its financial sector,
stimulate domestic demand, deregulate its economy,
and further open its markets to foreign goods and
services. We look forward to substantial and
effective actions to achieve a domestic demand-led
recovery, to restore health to the financial sector and
to make progress on deregulation and opening
markets. Strong, immediate, tangible actions by the
Japanese Government are vital to make Japan again
an engine of growth and to help spur a broader
economic recovery in Asia, as well as reinvigorate a
critical market for U.S. goods and services.

South Korea

At their summit meeting in June 1998, President
Clinton reaffirmed to President Kim that the United
States will continue its strong support for his efforts to
reform the Korean economy, liberalize trade and
investment, strengthen the banking system and
implement the IMF program. President Clinton
reiterated our commitment to provide bilateral finance
if needed under appropriate conditions. The two
presidents discussed a number of concrete steps to
promote growth in both our countries and explored
ways to more fully open our markets and to further
integrate the Republic of Korea into the global
economy, including new discussions on a bilateral
investment treaty. They also signed an Open Skies
agreement which permits unrestricted air service
between our two countries.

Thailand

Thailand, a key U.S. security partner in the region, also
faces serious economic difficulties. The U.S.
government continues to work with Thailand to ease

the strain of the financial crisis. We are taking concrete
steps to lessen the financial burden of military
programs, including decreasing the scope of military
contacts such as visits and exercises, and looking for
ways to reduce the impact of the crisis on security
assistance programs. The Royal Thai armed forces
have earned high marks for their stabilizing influence.

Promoting Democracy

Some have argued that democracy is unsuited for Asia
or at least for some Asian nations—that human rights
are relative and that Western support for international
human rights standards simply mask a form of cultural
imperialism. The democratic aspirations and
achievements of the Asian peoples prove these
arguments incorrect. We will continue to support those
aspirations and to promote respect for human rights in
all nations. Each nation must find its own form of
democracy, and we respect the variety of democratic
institutions that have emerged in Asia. But there is
no cultural justification for tyranny, torture or denial of
fundamental freedoms. Our strategy includes efforts
to:

- pursue a constructive, goal—oriented approach to
achieving progress on human rights and rule of
law issues with China;

- foster a meaningful political dialogue between the
ruling authorities in Burma and the democratic
opposition;

- work with the new government of Indonesia to
promote improved respect for human rights,
strengthened democratic processes and an
internationally acceptable political solution in East
Timor;

- work with ASEAN to restore democracy to
Cambodia and encourage greater respect for
human rights; and

- achieve the fullest possible accounting of missing
U.S. service members, promote greater respect
for human rights in Vietnam, and press for full
Vietnamese implementation of the Resettlement
Opportunity for Vietnamese Returnees (ROVR)

program.

47

The Western Hemisphere

Our hemisphere enters the twenty—first century with an
unprecedented opportunity to secure a future of
stability and prosperity—building on the fact that every
nation in the hemisphere except Cuba is democratic
and committed to free market economies. The end of
armed conflict in Central America and other
improvements in regional security have coincided with
remarkable political and economic progress throughout
the Americas. The people of the Americas are already
taking advantage of the vast opportunities being
created as emerging markets are connected through
electronic commerce and as robust democracies allow
individuals to more fully express their preferences.
Sub-regional political, economic and security
cooperation in North America, the Caribbean, Central
America, the Andean region and the Southern Cone
have contributed positively to peace and prosperity
throughout the hemisphere. Equally important, the
people of the Americas have reaffirmed their
commitment to combat together the difficult new threats
of narcotics and corruption. U.S. strategy is to secure
the benefits of the new climate in the hemisphere while
safeguarding the United States and our friends against
these threats.

The 1994 Summit of the Americas in Miami produced
hemispheric agreement to negotiate the Free Trade
Area of the Americas (FTAA) and agreements on
measures that included continued economic reform
and enhanced cooperation on issues such as the
environment, counternarcotics, money laundering
and corruption. Celebrating the region’s embrace of
democracy and free markets, that historic meeting
committed the United States to a more cooperative
relationship with the hemisphere. U.S. agencies
have used the Miami Summit Action Plan to establish
productive relationships and strengthen cooperation
with their Latin American and Caribbean counterparts
in a host of areas.

Our engagement with the hemisphere reached
unprecedented levels in 1997 and 1998. In May
1997, President Clinton traveled to Mexico for a
summit meeting with President Zedillo, then held
summits with Central American leaders in Costa Rica
and Caribbean leaders in Barbados, highlighting the
importance of working with our neighbors to solve
problems of great concern to Americans such as
drugs, immigration and transnational crime. In
October 1997, in Venezuela, Brazil and Argentina,

48

the President underscored opportunities for
cooperation with vibrant democracies and their fast
growing markets.

This substantial engagement with the hemisphere at
the beginning of the President’s second term
continued at the Second Summit of the Americas in
Santiago, Chile in April 1998. At the Summit, the
leaders of the hemisphere focused on the areas
needed to prepare our citizens for the 21“ century:
education, democracy, economic integration and
poverty relief.

Enhancing Security

The principal security concerns in the hemisphere are
transnational in nature, such as drug trafficking,
organized crime, money laundering, illegal
immigration, and terrorism. In addition, our
hemisphere is leading the way in recognizing the
dangers to democracy produced by corruption and
rule of law issues. These threats, especially narcotics,
produce adverse social effects that undermine the
sovereignty, democracy and national security of
nations in the hemisphere.

We are striving to eliminate the scourge of drug
trafficking in our hemisphere. At the Santiago Summit,
the assembled leaders launched a Multilateral
Counterdrug Alliance to better organize and
coordinate efforts in the hemisphere to stem the
production and distribution of drugs. The centerpiece
of this alliance will be a mechanism to evaluate each
member country’s progress in achieving their agreed
counternarcotics goals. Summit leaders also agreed
to improve cooperation on extraditing and
prosecuting individuals charged with narcotics
trafficking and related crimes; strengthen efforts
against money laundering and forfeiture of assets
used in criminal activity; reinforce international and
national mechanisms to halt illicit traffic and diversion
of chemical precursors; enhance national programs
for fostering greater awareness of the dangers of
drug abuse, preventing illicit drug consumption and
providing treatment, rehabilitation and reintegration;
and eliminate illicit crops through national alternative
development programs, eradication and interdiction.

We are also pursuing a number of bilateral and
regional counternarcotics initiatives. As part of our
partnership with Mexico, we are striving to increase
counterdrug and law enforcement cooperation, while in

the Caribbean we are intensifying a coordinated effort
on counternarcotics and law enforcement. The
reduction in trade barriers resulting from the North
American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) allows more
inspection resources to be directed to thwarting
attempts by organized crime to exploit the expanding
volume of trade for increased drug smuggling.

The Santiago Summit addressed other transnational
security concerns as well. Summit leaders called for
the rapid ratification and entry into force of the 1997
Inter-American Convention to Combat the Illicit
Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms,
Ammunition Explosives and Related Material. They
also agreed to encourage states to accede to the
international conventions related to terrorism and
convene, under the auspices of the OAS, the Second
Specialized Inter-American Conference to evaluate
the progress attained and to define future courses of
action for the prevention, combat and elimination of
terrorism.

We are advancing regional security cooperation
through bilateral security dialogues, multilateral efforts
in the Organization of American States (OAS) and
Summit of the Americas on transparency and regional
confidence and security building measures, exercises
and exchanges with key militaries (principally focused
on peacekeeping), and regular Defense Ministerials.
Working with Argentina, Brazil and Chile, the other
three guarantor nations of the Peru-Ecuador peace
process, the United States has brought the parties
closer to a permanent solution to this decades—old
border dispute, the resolution of which is important to
regional stability. The Military Observer Mission,
Ecuador—Peru (MOMEP), composed of the four
guarantor nations, successfully separated the warring
factions, created the mutual confidence and security
among the guarantor nations. The U.S. sponsored
multilateral military exercise focused on combating
drug trafficking, supporting disaster relief (particularly
important because of the El Nino phenomenon) and
participation in international peacekeeping. It has
spurred unprecedented exercises among neighboring
countries in Central America and the Southern Cone.
Additionally, the Southern Cone has increasingly
shared the burden of international peacekeeping
operations. The Santiago Summit tasked the OAS to
expand topics relating to confidence and security
building measures with the goal of convening a
Special Conference on Security by the beginning of
the next decade. Several countries in the region
have joined our call to promote transparency by

publishing white papers on defense. Our efforts to
encourage multilateral cooperation are enhancing
confidence and security within the region and will
help expand our cooperative efforts to combat the
transnational threats to the Western Hemisphere,
particularly in Columbia where social, political and
criminal violence is spilling across borders. We are
also working to ensure successful transfer of
stewardship of the Panama Canal to the Panamanian
people.

In light of the advances in democratic stability
throughout Latin America and mindful of the need for
restraint, the Administration has moved to case-by-
case consideration of requests for advanced
conventional arms transfers, on par with other areas of
the world. Such requests will be reviewed in a way that
will serve our objectives of promoting defense
cooperation, restraint in arms acquisition and military
budgets, and an increased focus on peacekeeping,
counternarcotics efforts and disaster relief.

Promoting Prosperity

Economic growth and integration in the Americas will
profoundly affect the prosperity of the United States
in the 215 century. Latin America has become the
fastest growing economic region in the world and our
fastest growing export market. In 1998, our exports to
Latin America and the Caribbean are expected to
exceed those to the EU.

Building on the vision articulated at Miami in 1994
and the groundwork laid by trade ministers over the
last four years, the Santiago Summit launched formal
negotiations to initiate the FTAA by 2005. The
negotiations will cover a broad range of important
issues, including market access, investment,
services, government procurement, dispute
settlement, agriculture, intellectual property rights,
competition policy, subsidies, anti—dumping and
countervailing duties. A Committee on Electronic
Commerce will explore the implications of electronic
commerce for the design of the FTAA, and a
Committee on Civil Society will provide a formal
mechanism for labor, business, consumer,
environmental and other non-government
organizations to make recommendations on the
negotiations so that all citizens can benefit from
trade. Governments also will cooperate on promoting
core labor standards recognized by the International
Labor Organization.

49

We seek to advance the goal of an integrated
hemisphere of free market democracies by
consolidating NAFTA’s gains and obtaining
Congressional Fast Track trade agreement
implementing authority. Since the creation of NAFTA,
our exports to Mexico have risen significantly while the
Agreement helped stabilize Mexico through its worst
financial crisis in modern history. Considering that
Mexico has now become our second—largest export
market, it is imperative that its economy remain open to
the United States and NAFTA helps to ensure that.

We will continue working with Mexico and interested
private parties to continue the mutually beneficial trade
with our largest trading partner and neighbor to the
north, Canada. We are also committed to delivering on
the President’s promise to negotiate a comprehensive
free trade agreement with Chile because of its
extraordinary economic performance and its active role
in promoting hemispheric economic integration.

While we support the freer flow of goods and
investment, there is also reason to be sensitive to the
concerns of smaller economies during the period of
transition to the global economy of the 215‘ century.
To address this problem, and in light of the increased
competition NAFTA presents to Caribbean trade, we
will seek Congressional approval to provide
enhanced trade benefits under the Caribbean Basin
Initiative (CBI) to help prepare that region for
participation in the FTAA. With the assistance of
institutions such as OPIC, we will encourage the
private sector to take the lead in developing small
and medium—sized businesses in the Caribbean
through the increased flow of investment capital. We
must also encourage Caribbean countries and
territories to implement programs to attract foreign
and domestic investment.

At the Santiago Summit, the hemisphere's leaders
reaffirmed that all citizens must participate in the
opportunities and prosperity created by free market
democracy. They pledged to ensure access to
financial services for a significant number of the 50
million micro, small and medium size enterprises in
the hemisphere by the year 2000, to work with
multilateral institutions and regional organizations to
invest about $400—500 million over the next three
years, and to streamline and decentralize property
registration and titling procedures and assure access
to justice for the poor. Governments will enhance
participation by promoting core labor standards
recognized by the ILO, strengthening gender equity,
working to eliminate exploitative child labor,

50

negotiating a new Declaration of Principles on
Fundamental Rights of Workers, and promoting
education and training for indigenous populations.
To improve quality of life, Summit leaders pledged to
pursue elimination of measles by the year 2000 and
reduce the incidence of diseases such as pneumonia
and mumps by the year 2002, to strengthen regional
networks of health information such as through
telemedicine, to give highest priority to reducing
infant malnutrition, and to strengthen cooperation to
implement Santa Cruz Sustainable Development
Plan of Action.

Promoting Democracy

Many Latin American nations have made tremendous
advances in democracy and economic progress over
the last several years. But our ability to sustain the
hemispheric agenda depends in part on meeting the
challenges posed by weak democratic institutions,
persistently high unemployment and crime rates, and
serious income disparities. In some Latin American
countries, citizens will not fully realize the benefits of
political liberalization and economic growth without
regulatory, judicial, law enforcement and educational
reforms, as well as increased efforts to integrate all
members of society into the formal economy.

At the Santiago Summit, the hemisphere's leaders
reaffirmed their commitment to strengthening
democracy, justice and human rights. They agreed
to intensify efforts to promote democratic reforms at
the regional and local level, protect the rights of
migrant workers and their families, improve the
capabilities and competence of civil and criminal
justice systems, and encourage a strong and active
civil society. They pledged to promptly ratify the
Inter-American Convention Against Corruption to
strengthen the integrity of governmental institutions.
They supported the creation of a Special Rapporteur
for Freedom of Expression as part of the Inter-
American Commission for Human Rights. The
Rapporteur will help resolve human rights cases
involving the press and focus international attention
on attacks against the hemisphere’s emerging Fourth
Estate, as their investigative reporting provokes
increasing threats from drug traffickers and other
criminal elements. Summit leaders also agreed to
establish an Inter-American Justice Studies Center to
facilitate training of personnel, to exchange of
information and other forms of technical cooperation
to improve judicial systems, to end impunity, combat

corruption and provide protection from rising
domestic and international crime, and to create a
secure legal environment for trade and investment.

The hemisphere’s leaders agreed at the Santiago
Summit that education is the centerpiece of reforms
aimed at making democracy work for all the people of
the Americas. The Summit Action Plan adopted at
Santiago will build on the achievements of the 1994
Miami Summit. It will advance numerous cooperative
efforts based on the guiding principles of equity,
quality, relevance and efficiency. The Santiago
Plan’s targets are to ensure by the year 2010 primary
education for 100% of children and access to quality
secondary education for at least 75% of young
people. The plan also includes solid commitments to
finance schools, textbooks, teacher training,
technology for education, to create education
partnerships between the public and private sectors,
to use technology to link schools across national
boundaries and to increase international exchanges
of students.

We are also seeking to strengthen norms for defense
establishments that are supportive of democracy,
transparency, respect for human rights and civilian
control in defense matters. Through continued
engagement with regional armed forces, facilitated by
our own modest military activities and presence in the
region, we are helping to transform civil—military
relations. Through initiatives such as the Defense
Ministerial of the Americas and the Center for
Hemispheric Defense Studies, we are increasing
civilian expertise in defense affairs and reinforcing the
positive trend in civilian control.

Haiti and Cuba are of special concern to the United
States. The restoration of democracy in Haiti remains
a positive example for the hemisphere. In Haiti we
continue to support respect for human rights and
economic growth by a Haitian government capable of
managing its own security and paving the way for a fair
presidential election in 2000. Our efforts to train law
enforcement officers in Haiti have transformed the
police from a despised and feared instrument of
repression to an accountable public safety agency.
We are committed to working with our partners in the
region and in the international community to meet the
challenge of institutionalizing Haiti’s economic and
political development. Haiti will benefit from a
Caribbean-wide acceleration of growth and investment,

stimulated in part by enhancement of CBI benefits.
The United States remains committed to promoting a
peaceful transition to democracy in Cuba and
forestalling a mass exodus that would endanger the
lives of migrants and the security of our borders. While
maintaining pressure on the regime to make political
and economic reforms, we continue to encourage the
emergence of a civil society to assist the transition to
democracy when the change comes. In March 1998,
President Clinton announced a number of measures
designed to build on the success of the Pope’s January
1998 visit to Cuba, expand the role of the Catholic
Church and other elements of civil society, and
increase humanitarian assistance. As the Cuban
people feel greater incentive to take charge of their
own future, they are more likely to stay at home and
build the informal and formal structures that will make
transition easier. Meanwhile, we remain firmly
committed to bilateral migration accords that ensure
migration in safe, legal and orderly channels.

The Middle East,
Southwest and South Asia

The May 1998 Indian and Pakistani nuclear tests
clearly illustrate that a wide range of events in this
region can have a significant impact on key U.S.
security objectives. Choices made in the Middle East,
Southwest and South Asia will determine whether
terrorists operating in and from the region are denied
the support they need to perpetrate their crimes,
whether weapons of mass destruction will imperil the
region and the world, whether the oil and gas fields of
the Caucasus and Central Asia become reliable energy
sources, whether the opium harvest in Afghanistan is
eliminated, and whether a just and lasting peace can
be established between Israel and the Arab countries.

Enhancing Security

The United States has enduring interests in pursuing a
just, lasting and comprehensive Middle East peace,
ensuring the security and well—being of Israel, helping
our Arab friends provide for their security, and
maintaining the free flow of oil at reasonable prices.
Our strategy reflects those interests and the unique
characteristics of the region as we work to extend the
range of peace and stability.

The Middle East Peace Process

An historic transformation has taken place in the
political landscape of the Middle East: peace
agreements are taking hold, requiring concerted
implementation efforts. The United States—as an
architect and sponsor of the peace process—has a
clear national interest in seeing the process deepen
and widen to include all Israel’s neighbors. We will
continue our steady, determined leadership—standing
with those who take risks for peace, standing against
those who would destroy it, lending our good offices
where we can make a difference and helping bring the
concrete benefits of peace to people’s daily lives.
Future progress will require movement in the following
areas:

- continued Israeli-Palestinian engagement on
remaining issues in the Interim Agreement,
and negotiation of permanent status issues;

- resuming Israeli—Syrian and Israeli—Lebanese
negotiations with the objective of achieving
peace treaties; and

- normalization of relations between Arab states
and Israel.

Southwest Asia

In Southwest Asia, the United States remains
focused on deterring threats to regional stability,
countering threats posed by WMD and protecting the
security of our regional partners, particularly from Iraq
and Iran. We will continue to encourage members of
the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) to work closely on
collective defense and security arrangements, help
individual GCC states meet their appropriate defense
requirements and maintain our bilateral defense
agreements.

We will maintain an appropriate military presence in
Southwest Asia using a combination of ground, air
and naval forces. As a result of the confrontation
with Iraq in late 1997 and early 1998 over to Iraqi
interference with UN inspection teams, we increased
our continuous military presence in the Gulf to back
our ongoing efforts to bring Iraq into compliance with
UN Security Council resolutions. Our forces in the
Gulf are backed by our ability to rapidly reinforce the
region in time of crisis, which we demonstrated
convincingly in late 1997 and early 1998. We remain

52

committed to enforcing the no—fly zones over northern
and southern Iraq, which are essential for implement-
ing the UN resolutions and preventing Saddam from
taking large scale military action against Kuwait or
the Kurd and Shia minorities in Iraq.

We would like to see Iraq’s reintegration into the
international community; however, we have made
clear that Iraq must comply with all relevant UN
Security Council resolutions. Saddam Hussein must
cease the cynical manipulation of UN humanitarian
programs and cooperate with Security Council
Resolution 1153, which authorizes increased
humanitarian assistance to the people of Iraq. Iraq
must also move from its posture of deny, delay and
obscure to a posture of cooperation and compliance
with the UN Security Council resolutions designed to
rid Iraq of WMD and their delivery systems. Iraq
must also com ply with the memorandum of
understanding reached with UN Secretary General
Kofi Annan in February 1998. Our policy is directed
not against the people of Iraq but against the
aggressive behavior of the government. Until that
behavior changes, our goal is containing the threat
Saddam Hussein poses to Iraq’s neighbors, the free
flow of Gulf oil and broader U.S. interests in the
Middle East.

Our policy toward Iran is aimed at changing the
behavior of the Iranian government in several key
areas, including its efforts to obtain weapons of mass
destruction and long—range missiles, its support for
terrorism and groups that violently oppose the peace
process, its attempts to undermine friendly
governments in the region, and its development of
offensive military capabilities that threaten our GCC
partners and the flow of oil.

There are signs of change in Iranian policies. In
December 1997, Iranian officials welcomed Chairman
Arafat to the Islamic Summit in Tehran and said that,
although they did not agree with the peace process,
they would not seek to impose their views and would
accept what the Palestinians could accept. In
January 1998, President Khatemi publicly denounced
terrorism and condemned the killing of innocent
Israelis. Iran's record in the war against drugs has
greatly improved and it has received high marks from
the UN for its treatment of more than two million Iraqi
and Afghan refugees. Iran is participating in
diplomatic efforts to bring peace and stability to
Afghanistan and is making a welcome effort to
improve relations with its neighbors in the Gulf.

We view these developments with interest, both with
regard to the possibility of Iran assuming its rightful
place in the world community and the chance for
better bilateral ties. We also welcome statements by
President Khatemi that suggest a possibility of
dialogue with the United States, and are taking
concrete steps in that direction. This month, we
implemented a new, more streamlined procedure for
issuing visas to Iranians who travel to the United
States frequently. We also revised our Consular
Travel Warning for Iran so that it better reflects
current attitudes in Iran towards American visitors.
We have supported cultural and academic
exchanges, and facilitated travel to the United States
by many Iranians.

However, these positive signs must be balanced
against the reality that Iran’s support for terrorism has
not yet ceased, serious violations of human rights
persist, its efforts to develop long range missiles,
including the 1,300 kilometer—range Shahab-3 it flight
tested in July 1998, and its efforts to acquire WMD
continue. The United States will continue to oppose
any country selling or transferring to Iran materials
and technologies that could be used to develop long-
range missiles or weapons of mass destruction.
Similarly, we oppose Iranian efforts to sponsor terror.

We are ready to explore further ways to build mutual
confidence and avoid misunderstandings with Iran.
We will strengthen our cooperation with allies to
encourage positive changes in Iranian behavior. If a
dialogue can be initiated and sustained in a way that
addresses the concerns of both sides, then the
United States would be willing to develop with the
Islamic Republic a road map leading to normal
relations.

South Asia

South Asia has experienced an important expansion of
democracy and economic reform. Our strategy is
designed to help the peoples of that region enjoy the
fruits of democracy and greater stability by helping
resolve long—standing conflict and implementing
confidence—building measures. Regional stability and
improved bilateral ties are also important for U.S. eco-
nomic interests in a region that contains a fifth of the
world’s population and one of its most important
emerging markets. We seek to establish relationships
with India and Pakistan that are defined in terms of
their own individual merits and reflect the full weight

and range of U.S. strategic, political and economic
interests in each country. In addition, we seek to work
closely with regional countries to stem the flow of illegal
drugs from South Asia, most notably from Afghanistan.

The United States has long urged India and Pakistan to
take steps to reduce the risk of conflict and to bring
their nuclear and missile programs into conformity with
international standards. The Indian and Pakistani
nuclear test explosions were unjustified and threaten
to spark a dangerous nuclear arms race in Asia. As
a result of those tests and in accordance with our
laws the United States imposed sanctions against
India and Pakistan. The sanctions include
termination of assistance except for humanitarian
assistance for food or other agricultural commodities;
termination of sales of defense articles or services;
termination of foreign military financing; denial of non-
agricultural credit, credit guarantees or other financial
assistance by any agency of the U.S. Government;
prohibiting U.S. banks from making any loan or
providing any credit to the governments of India and
Pakistan except for the purpose of purchasing food or
other agricultural commodities; and prohibiting export
of specific goods and technology subject to export
licensing by the Commerce Department.

India and Pakistan are contributing to a self—defeating
cycle of escalation that does not add to the security
of either country. They have put themselves at odds
with the international community over these nuclear
tests. In concert with the other permanent members
of the UN Security Council and the G—8 nations, the
United States has called on both nations to renounce
further nuclear tests, to sign the Comprehensive Test
Ban Treaty immediately and without conditions, and
to resume their direct dialogue and take decisive
steps to reduce tensions in South Asia. We also
strongly urge these states to refrain from any actions,
such as testing, deployment or weaponization of
ballistic missiles, that would further undermine
regional and global stability. And we urge them to
join the clear international consensus in support of
nonproliferation and to join in negotiations in Geneva
for a cutoff of fissile material production.

Promoting Prosperity

The United States has two principle economic
objectives in the region: to promote regional economic
cooperation and development, and to ensure
unrestricted flow of oil from the region. We seek to

53

promote regional trade and cooperation on infrastruc-
ture through the multilateral track of the peace process,
including revitalization of the Middle East and North
Africa (MENA) economic summits.

The United States depends on oil for about 40 percent
of its primary energy needs and roughly half of our oil
needs are met with imports. Although we import less
than 10% of Persian Gulf exports, our allies in Europe
and Japan account for about 85% of these exports.
Previous oil shocks and the Gulf War underscore the
strategic importance of the region and show the impact
that an interruption of oil supplies can have on the
world’s economy. Appropriate responses to events
such as Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait can limit the magni-
tude of the crisis. Over the longer term, U.S. depen-
dence on access to these and other foreign oil
sources will remain important as our reserves are
depleted. The United States must remain vigilant to
ensure unrestricted access to this critical resource.
Thus, we will continue to demonstrate U.S. commit-
ment and resolve in the Persian Gulf.

Promoting Democracy

We encourage the spread of democratic values
throughout the Middle East and Southwest and South
Asia and will pursue this objective by a constructive
dialogue with countries in the region. In Iran, for
example, we hope the nation's leaders will carry out
the people's mandate for a government that respects
and protects the rule of law, both in its internal and
external affairs. We will promote responsible
indigenous moves toward increasing political
participation and enhancing the quality of governance
and will continue to vigorously challenge many
governments in the region to improve their human
rights records. Respect for human rights also
requires rejection of terrorism. If the nations in the
region are to safeguard their own citizens from the
threat of terror, they cannot tolerate acts of
indiscriminate violence against civilians, nor can they
offer refuge to those who commit such acts.

U.S. policies in the Middle East and Southwest Asia
are not anti—Islamic—an allegation made by some
opponents of our efforts to help bring lasting peace
and stability to the region. Islam is the fastest-
growing religious faith in the United States. We
respect deeply its moral teachings and its role as a
source of inspiration and instruction for hundreds of
millions of people around the world. U.S. policy in

54

the region is directed at the actions of governments
and terrorist groups, not peoples or faiths. The
standards we would like all the nations in the region
to observe are not merely Western, but universal.

Africa

In recent years, the United States has supported
significant change in Africa with considerable
success: multi—party democracies are more common
and elections are more frequent and open, human
rights are more widely respected, the press is more
free, U.S.-Africa trade is expanding, and a pragmatic
consensus on the need for economic reform is
emerging. A new, post—colonial generation of
leadership is reaching maturity in Africa, with more
democratic and pragmatic approaches to solving their
countries’ problems and developing their human and
natural resources.

To further those successes, President Clinton made
an unprecedented 12-day trip to Africa in March—April
1998. With President Museveni of Uganda, he co-
hosted the Entebbe Summit for Peace and Prosperity
to advance cooperation on conflict prevention, human
rights and economic integration. The summit was
attended by Prime Minister Meles of Ethiopia,
Presidents Moi of Kenya, Mkapa of Tanzania,
Bizimungu of Rwanda and Kabila of Congo. During
the trip, the President unveiled a number of new
programs to support democracy, prosperity and
opportunity, including initiatives on education, rule of
law, food security, trade and investment, aviation,
and conflict resolution. President Clinton directly
addressed the violent conflicts that have threatened
African democracy and prosperity.

Sustaining our success in Africa will require that we
identify those issues that most directly affect our
interests and where we can make a difference
through efficient targeting of our resources. A key
challenge is to engage the remaining autocratic
regimes to encourage those countries to follow the
example of other African countries that are success-
fully implementing political and economic reforms.

Enhancing Security

Serious transnational security threats emanate from
pockets of Africa, including state-sponsored

terrorism, narcotics trafficking, international crime,
environmental damage and disease. These threats
can only be addressed through effective, sustained
engagement in Africa. We have already made
significant progress in countering some of these
threats—investing in efforts to combat environmental
damage and disease, leading international efforts to
halt the proliferation of land mines and the demining
of Angola, Mozambique, Namibia, Rwanda, Ethiopia
and Eritrea. We continue efforts to reduce the flow of
narcotics through Africa and to curtail international
criminal activity based in Africa. We seek to keep
Africa free of weapons of mass destruction by
supporting South Africa's nuclear disarmament and
accession to the NPT as a non-nuclear weapon state,
securing the indefinite and unconditional extension of
the NPT, and promoting establishment of the African
Nuclear Weapons Free Zone.

Libya and Sudan continue to pose a threat to regional
stability and the national security and foreign policy
interests of the United States. Our policy toward
Libya is designed to block its efforts to obtain
weapons of mass destruction and development of
conventional military capabilities that threaten its
neighbors, and to compel Libya to cease its support
for terrorism and its attempts to undermine other
governments in the region. The government of Libya
has continued these activities despite calls by the
Security Council that it demonstrate by concrete
actions its renunciation of terrorism. Libya also
continues to defy the United Nations by refusing to
turn over the two defendants in the terrorist bombing
of Pan Am 103. We remain determined that the
perpetrators of this act and the attack on UTA 772 be
brought to justice. We have moved to counter
Sudan’s support for international terrorism and
regional destabilization by imposing comprehensive
sanctions on the Khartoum regime, continuing to
press for the regime’s isolation through the UN
Security Council, and enhancing the ability of
Sudan’s neighbors to resist Khartoum—backed
insurgencies in their countries through our Frontline
States initiative.

Persistent conflict and continuing political instability in
some African countries remain chronic obstacles to
Africa’s development and to U.S. interests there,
including unhampered access to oil and other vital
natural resources. Our efforts to resolve conflict
include working to fully implement the Lusaka
Accords in Angola, sustaining the fragile new
government in Liberia, supporting the recently

restored democratic government in Sierra Leone and
the Economic Community of West African States
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) efforts to ensure
security there, and achieving a peaceful, credible
transition to democratic government in Nigeria, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Congo-
Brazzaville.

To foster regional efforts to promote prosperity,
stability and peace in Africa, the United States in
1996 launched the African Crisis Response Initiative
(ACRI) to work with Africans to enhance their
capacity to conduct effective peacekeeping and
humanitarian operations. We are coordinating with
the French, British, other donor countries and African
governments in developing a sustainable plan of
action. The United States has already trained
battalions from Uganda, Senegal, Malawi, Mali and
Ghana, and is planning to train troops in Benin and
Cote D'Ivoire later this year. We are consulting
closely on ACRI activity with the UN Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) and its Crisis Management
Center, and African sub—regional organizations
already pursuing similar capacity enhancements. We
hope and expect that other African countries will also
participate in the effort in the future, building a well-
trained, interoperable, local capacity for
peacekeeping and humanitarian operations in a
region that has been fraught with turbulence and
crisis and all too dependent upon outside assistance
to deal with these problems.

On April 1, 1998, President Clinton announced that
the United States will be establishing the African
Center for Security Studies (ACSS). The ACSS will
be a regional center modeled after the George C.
Marshall Center in Germany, designed in
consultation with African nations and intended to
promote the exchange of ideas and information
tailored specifically for African concerns. The goal is
for ACSS to be a source of academic yet practical
instruction in promoting the skills necessary to make
effective national security decisions in democratic
governments, and engage African military and civilian
defense leaders in a substantive dialogue about
defense policy planning in democracies.

Promoting Prosperity

A stable, democratic, prosperous Africa will be a
better economic partner, a better partner for security

55

and peace, and a better partner in the fights against
drug trafficking, crime, terrorism, disease and
environmental degradation. An economically
dynamic Africa will be possible only when Africa is
fully integrated into the global economy. Our aim,
therefore, is to assist African nations to implement
economic reforms, create favorable climates for trade
and investment, and achieve sustainable
development. A majority of sub—Saharan Africa’s 48
countries have adopted market—oriented economic
and political reforms in the past seven years.

To support this positive trend, the President has
proposed the Partnership for Economic Growth and
Opportunity in Africa to support the economic
transformation underway in Africa. The
Administration is working closely with Congress to
implement key elements of this initiative through
rapid passage of the African Growth and Opportunity
Act. By significantly broadening market access,
spurring growth in Africa and helping the poorest
nations eliminate or reduce their bilateral debt, this
bill will better enable us to help African nations
undertake difficult economic reforms and build better
lives for their people through sustainable growth and
development.

Further integrating Africa into the global economy has
obvious political and economic benefits. It will also
directly serve U.S. interests by continuing to expand
an already important new market for U.S. exports.
The more than 700 million people of sub—Saharan
Africa represent one of the world’s largest largely
untapped markets. Although the United States
enjoys only a seven percent market share in Africa,
already 100,000 American jobs depend on our
exports there. Increasing both the U.S. market share
and the size of the African market will bring tangible
benefits to U.S. workers and increase prosperity and
economic opportunity in Africa. To encourage U.S.
trade with and investment in Africa, we are pursuing
several new initiatives and enhancements to the
Partnership for Economic Growth and Opportunity,
including greater market access, targeted technical
assistance, enhanced bilateral and World Bank debt
relief, and increased bilateral trade ties.

To further our trade objectives in Africa, the President
inaugurated the Ron Brown Commercial Center in
Johannesburg, South Africa on March 28, 1998. The
Center, which is operated and funded by the
Department of Commerce, provides support for
American companies looking to enter or expand into

56

the sub—Saharan African market. It promotes U.S.
exports through a range of support programs and
facilitates business contacts and partnerships
between African and American businesses. The
Center also serves as a base for other agencies such
as the Export-Import Bank, the Trade Development
Agency and USTR to expand their assistance to
business.

Because safe air travel and secure airports are
necessary for increasing trade, attracting investment,
and expanding tourism, the President on April 1,
1998 announced the "Safe Skies for Africa" initiative.
The goals of this $1.2 million program—funded by the
Departments of State and Transportation—are to
work in partnership with Africa to increase the
number of sub—Saharan African countries that meet
ICAO standards for aviation safety, improve security
at 8-12 airports in the region within 3 years, and
improve regional air navigation services in Africa by
using modern satellite-based navigation aids and
communications technology. The initiative focuses
on safety assessments and security surveys in
selected countries and formulating action plans
together with Africa civil aviation authorities to bring
aviation safety and security practices in Africa up to
accepted world standards.

To support the desire of African nations to invest in a
better and healthier future for their children, the
President on March 24, 1998 announced three new
initiatives to improve educational standards, ensure
adequate food and agricultural production, and fight
the deadly infectious diseases that claim the lives of
too many African children.

- The Education for Development and
Democracy Initiative seeks to boost African
integration into the global community by
improving the quality of, and technology for,
education in Africa. The initiative is centered
on community resource centers, public-
private partnerships, and educating and
empowering girls. We plan on spending
approximately $120 million over two years in
support of this initiative.

- The Africa Food Security Initiative will assist
African nations in strengthening agriculture
and food security in a number of key areas,
including production of healthy and
alternative crops, better market efficiency
and distribution of existing crops, increased

trade and investment in agricultural
industries, attacking crop diseases, and
increasing access to agricultural technology
systems to assist with increased crop
production and distribution. Our pilot budget
for the first two years of the initiative will be
$61 million, which complements USAID’s
current investments in these efforts.

- The third initiative is combating the infectious
diseases that claim many young lives. To
help combat malaria, we will provide an
additional $1 million grant to provide further
assistance to the Multilateral Initiative on
Malaria. The grant will focus on continuing
educational seminars and will support the
Regional Malaria Lab in Mali to reinforce its
position as a regional center of excellence in
Africa. This effort will complement our
ongoing Infectious Disease Initiative for
Africa that focuses on surveillance, response,
prevention and building local resistance to
infectious diseases.

Promoting Democracy

In Africa as elsewhere, democracies have proved
more peaceful, stable and reliable partners with
which we can work and are more likely to pursue
sound economic policies. We will continue to work to
sustain the important progress Africans have
achieved to date and to broaden the growing circle of
African democracies.

Restoration of democracy and respect for human
rights in Nigeria has long been one of our major
objectives in Africa. In June 1998, President Clinton
reaffirmed to Nigeria’s new leadership the friendship
of the United States for the people of Nigeria and
underscored our desire for improved bilateral
relations in the context of Nigeria taking swift and
significant steps toward a successful transition to a
democratically elected civilian government that
respects the human rights of its citizens. The release

of some political prisoners by the Nigerian
government is an encouraging sign, but much more
needs to be done and the United States will continue
to press for a credible transition to a democratic,
civilian government.

Through President Clinton’s $30 million Great Lakes
Justice Initiative, the United States will work with both
the people and governments of the Democratic
Republic of Congo, Rwanda and Burundi to support
judicial systems which are impartial, credible,
effective and inclusive. This initiative seeks to
strengthen judicial bodies, such as relevant Ministries
of Justice and Interior; improve the functioning of
court systems, prosecutors, police and prison
systems; work with national officials on specific
problem areas such as creation of civilian police
forces and legal assistance programs; support
training programs for police and judiciary officials;
develop improved court administration systems;
provide human rights training for military personnel
and support prosecution of abuses perpetrated by
military personnel; demobilize irregular elements of
standing armies and reintegrate them into society
and programs; and demobilize child soldiers.

In addition, we will work with our allies to find an
effective formula for promoting stability, democracy
and respect for human rights in the Democratic
Republic of Congo so that it and a democratic Nigeria
can become the regional centers for economic
growth, and democratic empowerment that they can
and should be. In order to help post—apartheid South
Africa achieve its economic, political, democratic and
security goals for all its citizens, we will continue to
provide substantial bilateral assistance, vigorously
promote U.S. trade and investment, and pursue close
cooperation and support for our mutual interests and
goals through the versatile Binational Commission
chaired by the Vice Presidents of each country.

Ultimately, the prosperity and security of Africa
depends on extensive political and economic reform,
and it is in the U.S. interest to support and promote
such reforms.

57

IV. Conclusions

Today, on the brink of the twenty—first century, we are
building new frameworks, partnerships and
institutions—and adapting existing ones—to strengthen
America’s security and prosperity. We are working to
construct new cooperative security arrangements, rid
the world of weapons that target whole populations,
build a truly global economy, and promote democratic
values and economic reform. Because diplomatic and
military responses alone may not deter threats to our
national security from non—state actors such as
criminals and terrorist groups, we must promote
increased cooperation among law enforcement
officials and improved methods for dealing with
international crime and terrorism. Ours is a moment
of historic opportunity to create a safer, more
prosperous tomorrow—to make a difference in the lives
of our citizens.

This promising state of affairs did not just happen, and
there is no guarantee that it will endure. The
contemporary era was forged by steadfast American
leadership over the last half century—through efforts
such as the Marshall Plan, NATO, the United Nations
and the World Bank. The clear dangers of the past
made the need for national security commitments and
expenditures obvious to the American people. Today,
the task of mobilizing public support for national
security priorities is more complicated. The complex
array of unique dangers, opportunities and
responsibilities outlined in this strategy are not always
readily apparent as we go about our daily lives focused
on immediate concerns. Yet, in a more integrated and
interdependent world, we must remain actively
engaged in world affairs to successfully advance our

national interests. To be secure and prosperous,
America must continue to lead.

Our international leadership focuses on President
Clinton's strategic priorities: to foster regional efforts
led by the community of democratic nations to
promote peace and prosperity in key regions of the
world, to create more jobs and opportunities for
Americans through a more open and competitive
trading system that also benefits others around the
world, to increase cooperation in confronting new
security threats that defy borders and unilateral
solutions, and to strengthen the intelligence, military,
diplomatic and law enforcement tools necessary to
meet these challenges. Our international leadership
is ultimately founded upon the power of our
democratic ideals and values. The spread of
democracy supports American values and enhances
our security and prosperity. The United States will
continue to support the trend toward democracy and
free markets by remaining actively engaged in the
world.

Our engagement abroad requires the active, sustained
support of the American people and the bipartisan
support of the U.S. Congress. This Administration
remains committed to explaining our security interests,
objectives and priorities to the nation and seeking the
broadest possible public and congressional support for
our security programs and investments. We will
continue to exercise our leadership in the world in a
manner that reflects our national values and protects
the security of this great nation.

59

