A NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY FOR A
GLOBAL AGE

THE WHITE HOUSE
DECEMBER 2000

Electronic copy scanned for Air War College, Nonresident Studies
This is not an ofﬁcial copy. If you spot a scanning error we missed, please tell us.
mike.mckim@maxwe||.af.mi|
Bold words/phrases were bold in the published hard copy.

Contents

Preface
I. Fundamentals of the Strategy

Goals ofthe Engagement Strategy
Elements of the Strategy

Guiding Principles of Engagement
The Efﬁcacy of Engagement

ll. Implementing the Strategy
Enhancing Security at Home and Abroad

Shaping the International Environment
Responding to Threats and Crises
Preparing for an Uncertain Future

Promoting Prosperity

Strengthening Financial Coordination
Promoting an Open Trading System
Enhancing American Competitiveness
Providing for Energy Security
Promoting Sustainable Development

Promoting Democracy and Human Rights

Emerging Democracies

Adherence to Universal Human Rights and
Democratic Principles

Humanitarian Activities

Ill. Integrated Regional Approaches

Europe and Eurasia

East Asia and the Pacific

The Western Hemisphere

Middle East, North Africa, Southwest and South Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa

IV. Conclusions

Preface

As we enter the new millennium, we are blessed to be citizens of a country enjoying
record prosperity, with no deep divisions at home, no overriding external threats abroad,
and history's most powerful military ready to defend our interests around the world.
Americans of earlier eras may have hoped one day to live in a nation that could claim just
one of these blessings. Probably few expected to experience them all; fewer still all at
once.

Our success is cause for pride in what we've done, and gratitude for what we have
inherited. But the most important matter is what we now make of this moment. Some may
be tempted to believe that open markets and societies will inevitably spread in an era of
expanding global trade and communications, or assume that our wealth and power alone
will protect us from the troubles of the outside world. But that approach falls for the old
myth of an "outside" world, and ignores the defining features of our age: the rise of
interdependence. More than ever, prosperity and security in America depend on
prosperity and security around the globe. In this age, America can advance its interests
and ideals only by leading efforts to meet common challenges. We must deploy
America's financial, diplomatic and military resources to stand up for peace and security,
promote global prosperity, and advance democracy and human rights around the world.

This demands strengthening our alliances with Europe and Asia, and adapting them to
meet emerging challenges. Our alliances in Europe and Asia are stronger because they
are organized to advance a permanent set of shared interests, rather than to defeat a
single threat. We must continue working with our allies towards a peaceful, democratic,
undivided Europe, with NATO as a deterrent to new conﬂict and a magnet for new
democracies. In Asia, we must build on strategic alliance with Japan to define new
approaches to post-Cold War threats. And, we must enhance cooperation with South
Korea as we encourage North Korea's emergence from isolation and continue to diminish
the missile threat.

Just as we strengthen our alliances, we must build principled, constructive, clear-eyed
relations with our former adversaries Russia and China. We must be mindful of threats to
peace while also maximizing chances that both Russia and China move toward greater
internal openness, stability and prosperity, seizing on the desire of both countries to
participate in the global economy and global institutions, insisting that both accept the
obligations as well as the benefits of integration. V\ﬁth Russia, that means continuing our
work to reduce the nuclear danger, to assure strategic stability, and to define its future
role in Europe, while supporting the emergence of democratic institutions and the rule of
law. V\ﬁth China, that means continuing to press for adherence to nonproliferation
standards and peaceful dialogue with Taiwan, while holding Chinese leaders to the
conditions of entry into the VVTO, which offer the best hope of internal reform.

To protect the peace and promote security, we must work to resolve conflicts before they
escalate and harm vital U.S. interests. In the 1990s, the United States has been actively
engaged in seeking peace in the Middle East, in the Balkans, between Greece and
Turkey, between India and Pakistan, in Northern Ireland, between Peru and Ecuador,
and Eritrea and Ethiopia. These efforts, undertaken in partnership with friends and allies,
help to avert wider conflicts that might endanger global stability, ease humanitarian
catastrophes, while adding moral authority to America's might in the world. American
overwhelming power and inﬂuence is far less likely to breed resentment if it is used to
advance the cause of peace.

We also must identify and address new national security challenges, accentuated by new
technology and open borders. We have identiﬁed a new security agenda that addresses
contemporary threats such as the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons, terrorism, and international crime. New efforts must continue to build on
initiatives such as the extension of the Nonproliferation Treaty, the containment of nations
seeking to acquire and use weapons of mass destruction, increased antiterrorism
cooperation, stepped up efforts to combat trafﬁcking in drugs, arms, and human- beings,
and our first-ever national strategy for cybersecurity. Our new security agenda recognizes
that in a global age, threats to America do not simply come from determined enemies and
deadly weapons. Our efforts to curb global warming through the Kyoto protocol are vital
to protect America from a future of rising sea levels and economic disruption. Our
leadership in the international fight against infectious diseases, especially HIV/AIDS, is
critical to defeat a threat that kills massively, crosses frontiers and destabilizes whole
regions.

Finally, there can be no security where there is no hope of prosperity. We must continue
to promote the spread of global markets in ways that advance economic growth, honor
our values, and help alleviate economic disparity. We must build on the creation of the
VVTO, and of NAFTA, on the passage of PNTR for China, on extending trade preferences
to nations in Africa and the Caribbean Basin, and on the nearly 300 trade agreements we
have signed that have contributed to the longest U.S. economic expansion in history. At
the same time, we must understand that trade, by itself, is not enough to lift the most
desperate nations out of poverty or prevent the world from becoming bitterly divided
between haves and have nots. That's why we have led in promoting the HIPC initiative to
provide deeper debt reduction for countries with unsustainable debt burdens, and placed
global development issues at the forefront of the international agenda.

More than 50 years ago, Harry Truman said: "We are in a position now of making the
world safe for democracy, if we don't crawl in a shell and act selfish and foolish." He
believed that in the wake of our triumph in World War II, America had the ability and a
responsibility to shape world events, so that we would not be shaped by them. Truman
was right, and the historical forces he saw then have only intensified since the Cold War.

The ability to assure global security, shared prosperity and freedom is beyond the power
of any one nation. But the actions of many nations often follow from the actions of one.
America today has power and authority never seen before in the history of the world. We
must continue use it, in partnership with those who share our values, to seize the
opportunities and meet the challenges of a global age.

V\ﬁ||iam J. Clinton

I. Fundamentals of the Strategy
Goals of the Engagement Strategy

Since the end of the Cold War, the United States and its allies have developed a position
of extraordinary strength. As the last decade of the 20th century unfolded, the United
States sought to use that strength wisely and in a manner consistent with the
fundamental values and ideals on which our republic was founded. The world is
undergoing an accelerating process of globalization in which technology is developing
exponentially; information is exchanged around the globe cheaply and instantaneously;
economies are increasingly interdependent; borders are more porous; people seek
political and economic freedoms; and groups seek expression of their ethnic identity.
Some of these trends add to our strength and security. Others present new challenges.
All entail great transformation and prescribe new imperatives for deﬁning our Nation's role
in this rapidly changing era.

In a democracy, a nation's foreign policy and security strategy must serve the needs of
the people. At the dawn of the 21 st century, our world is very different from that of our
Founding Fathers, yet the basic objectives in the preamble to the Constitution remain
timeless:

provide for the common defence, promote the general Welfare, and secure the
blessings of liberty to ourselves and our posterity.

The changes we have seen in the last decade do not alter these fundamental purposes.
They merely blur the dividing line between domestic and foreign policy and heighten the
imperative for a cohesive set of active U.S. efforts, both at home and abroad, to pursue
three modern day goals derived from the preamble's objectives: enhancing security at
home and abroad, promoting prosperity, and promoting democracy and human
rights. To accomplish these three goals in an ever-shrinking world, we have developed a
series of policies, now recognized as the elements of our strategy for engagement.

Elements of the Strategy

Shaping the International Environment

A primary element of our strategy of engagement has been to help fashion a new
international system that promotes peace, stability, and prosperity. This has involved
remolding and shaping both sides of the Cold War bipolar system. It has meant both
adapting our alliances and encouraging the reorientation of other states, including
former adversaries.

The United States has led the transformation of what were defensive entities into
proactive instruments for meeting post-Cold War challenges. Under U.S. leadership,
NATO -- our most important Cold War alliance -- has formally revised its strategic
concept, successfully ended aggression in Bosnia and Kosovo, and brought new

members into the Alliance while holding out the prospect of further enlargement. It has
increasingly pursued new initiatives and missions such as the Partnership for Peace
(PFP) and peacekeeping operations with partners to help stabilize the continent. New
dialogue between historic adversaries interested in joining NATO has helped to reconcile
several long-standing disputes among countries in the region. Further challenges exist,
but the signs of progress and nature of the changes are encouraging.

Other important security arrangements we forged in the Cold War remain strong in the
post-Cold War world. For instance, in 1997 the United States and Japan revised their
guidelines for defense cooperation. Our security commitments to the Republic of Korea
and Australia also remain strong, as do our defense relations with Thailand and the
Philippines, and new security cooperation exists with our friends in the Persian Gulf
region.

Nations with whom we had been philosophically opposed during much of the Cold War
are in the process of tremendous political and economic change. Our engagement with
these states over the last eight years has been focused on encouraging them to
undertake important political and economic reforms while at the same time dissuading
them from regressing into confrontational relationships. Our efforts with the most
populous of these nations -- China and Russia -- have been intended to offer
opportunities and incentives for proactive participation, while also encouraging them to be
responsible members of the world community. This means progress in respecting the
rights of individuals and nations in areas as diverse as the environment, humanitarian
issues, the rule of law, and economic fairness. While the outcome of transformation in
these nations is not altogether certain, our engagement has had a positive impact on
both regional and global stability.

The United States has sought to strengthen the post-Cold War international system by
encouraging democratization, open markets, free trade, and sustainable
development. These efforts have produced measurable results. The number of
democracies, as a percentage of world states, has increased by 14% since 1992. For the
first time in history, over half of the world's population lives under democratic governance.
Our national security is a direct beneﬁciary of democracy's spread, as democracies are
less likely to go to war with one another, more likely to become partners for peace and
security, and more likely to pursue peaceful means of internal conﬁict resolution that
promote both intrastate and regional stability.

The globalization of trade and investment, spurred by new technologies, open borders,
and increasingly open societies, is a critical aspect of the 21 st century world. United
States efforts to expand trade and investment with both traditional and new trading
partners fuel growth in our economy. United States efforts to extend market reforms to
former adversaries and neutrals also enhance our security by increasing economic
cooperation, empowering reformers, and promoting openness and democracy overseas.
Economic freedoms routinely facilitate political freedoms. In addition to these
opportunities, economic globalization also presents its proponents with tough challenges,
such as assisting countries that embrace but are nonetheless left behind by the dynamics
of globalization or working with countries that reject these dynamics for fear of losing their
cultural or national identity.

Preventing conflict has been a hallmark of U.S. foreign policy under a strategy of
engagement. All over the world, the United States has selectively used diplomatic means,
economic aid, military presence, and deterrence as tools for promoting peace. We also
assist other countries to develop their own defense capabilities through our foreign
assistance and security assistance programs. In doing so, we have focused on the

threats and opportunities most relevant to our interests as well as our values, and applied
our resources where we can make the greatest difference.

Responding to Threats and Crises

The persistence of major interstate conflict has required us to maintain the means for
countering potential regional aggressors. Long-standing tensions and territorial
division on the Korean peninsula and territorial ambitions in the Persian Gulf currently
deﬁne the main tenets of this requirement. For the foreseeable future, the United States,
preferably in concert with allies, must have the capability to deter -- and if that fails, to
defeat -- large-scale, cross-border aggression in two distant theaters in overlapping time
frames.

Globally, as a result of more porous borders, rapid changes in technology, greater
information flow, and the potential destructive power within the reach of small states,
groups, and individuals, the United States ﬁnds itself confronting new threats that pose
strategic challenges to our interests and values. These include the potential use and
continued proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and their means of
delivery, proliferation of small arms and light weapons, threats to our information/cyber
security, international migrant smuggling and trafficking in persons, and the ability to
disrupt our critical infrastructure. As a result, defense of the homeland against WMD
terrorism has taken on a new importance, making coordinated Federal, state, and local
government efforts imperative. The Domestic Preparedness Program has received
signiﬁcant resources to address immediate threats to our security. Ongoing efforts on
National Missile Defense are developing the capability to defend the ﬁfty states against a
limited missile attack from states that threaten international peace and security.
Prevention remains our ﬁrst line of defense to lessen the availability of weapons of mass
destruction being sought by such aggressor nations. To that end, we continue to work
with Russia to control possible leakage of former Soviet nuclear, chemical, and biological
weapons materials and expertise to proliferant states.

We are also vigorously pursuing a strengthening of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty,
the Chemical and Biological Weapons Conventions, the Missile Technology Control
Regime, and entry into force of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty at the
earliest possible time. Other persistent threats to our security in peacetime include
international terrorism, drug trafﬁcking, other organized crime, and environmental
degradation. The United States has made great strides in restructuring its national
security apparatus to address new threats with diplomatic, economic, and military tools.

Fragmentation of a number of states, which helped lead to the collapse of the Cold War's
bipolar alignment, has caused turmoil within several regions of the world. This turmoil, a
result of re-awakened ethnic and religious divisions and territorial ambitions, has reignited
old conflicts and resulted in substantial bloodshed. U.S. leadership in steering
international peace and stability operations has restored and maintained peace in a
number of locations. We have been more inclined to act where our interests and values
are both at stake and where our resources can affect tangible improvement, as in Bosnia
and Kosovo. In each of these instances, atrocities against, and the expulsion of, people
in the heart of Europe undermined the very values over which we had fought two World
Wars and the Cold War. Left unchecked, they could have spread elsewhere throughout
Europe and harmed the NATO alliance. We thus saw that our interests and values were
affected to a sufficient degree to warrant U.S. military intervention in both Bosnia and
Kosovo.

As we look to the future, our strategy must therefore be sufficiently robust so that when
we choose to engage, we can do so to prevent conflict, assist failing states, or counter
potential regional aggressors as necessary.

Preparing for an Uncertain Future

Meeting this widening array of new threats to our security will require us to transform our
capabilities and organizations. V\ﬁthin our military, this transformation has taken several
forms: focused science and technology efforts; concept development and
experimentation by the Services, combatant commands, and the Joint Staff; robust
processes to implement change; and new approaches to foster a culture of bold
innovation and dynamic leadership.

The process of transformation must not end solely with defense. Preparation must also
include diplomatic, intelligence, law enforcement, and economic efforts if we are to meet
the new threats that rapidity of technological change brings to the hands of adversaries,
potential and actual. Our government is therefore implementing interagency approaches
to formulate, and then execute, policy and plans for dealing with potential contingencies.
In addition, preventative diplomacy, often undergirded by the deterrence of our full
military capabilities, may help contain or resolve problems before they erupt into crises or
contingency operations.

Summary

The elements of engagement -- adapting alliances; encouraging the reorientation of other
states, including former adversaries; encouraging democratization, open markets, free
trade, and sustainable development; preventing conflict; countering potential regional
aggressors; confronting new threats; and steering international peace and stability
operations -- define the Nation's blueprint for a strategy of engagement. These elements
support three strategic concepts for engagement: shaping the international environment,
responding to threats and crises, and preparing for an uncertain future. The blueprint and
the concepts it supports have served the United States well in a rapidly changing world.
Refined by experience, the strategy is a wise roadmap for national security in the 21st
century.

Guiding Principles of Engagement

Both our goals, and the policies we pursue to achieve these goals, must reflect two
guiding principles that influence both our national character and legacy: protecting our
national interests and advancing our values. Throughout history, all sovereign nations
have been guided by protection of their national interests, even if they have deﬁned these
interests quite differently. Many countries have also been guided by a desire to advance
their values. Few, however, have chosen to advance those values principally through the
power of their example instead of the might of their military. Historically, the United States
has chosen to let our example be the strongest voice of our values. Both our goals and
the policies we pursue to achieve these goals reflect these guiding principles.

Protecting our National Interests

Our national interests are wide-ranging. They cover those requirements essential to the
survival and well being of our Nation as well as the desire to see us, and others, abide by
principles such as the rule of law, upon which our republic was founded.

We divide our national interests into three categories: vital, important, and humanitarian.
Vital interests are those directly connected to the survival, safety, and vitality of our
nation. Among these are the physical security of our territory and that of our allies, the
safety of our citizens both at home and abroad, protection against WMD proliferation, the
economic well-being of our society, and the protection of our critical infrastructures--
including energy, banking and ﬁnance, telecommunications, transportation, water
systems, vital human services, and government services--from disruption intended to
cripple their operation. We will do what we must to defend these interests. This may
involve the use of military force, including unilateral action, where deemed necessary or
appropriate.

The second category, important national interests, affects our national well being or that
of the world in which we live. Principally, this may include developments in regions where
America holds a significant economic or political stake, issues with significant global
environmental impact, infrastructure disruptions that destabilize but do not cripple smooth
economic activity, and crises that could cause destabilizing economic turmoil or
humanitarian movement. Examples of when we have acted to protect important national
interests include our successful efforts to end the brutal conﬁict and restore peace in
Kosovo, or our assistance to our Asian and Pacific allies and friends in support of the
restoration of order and transition to nationhood in East Timor.

The third category is humanitarian and other longer-term interests. Examples include
reacting to natural and manmade disasters; acting to halt gross violations of human
rights; supporting emerging democracies; encouraging adherence to the rule of law and
civilian control of the military; conducting Joint Recovery Operations worldwide to account
for our country's war dead; promoting sustainable development and environmental
protection; or facilitating humanitarian demining.

Threats or challenges to our national interests could require a range of responses.
Wherever possible, we seek to avert conﬁict or relieve humanitarian disasters through
diplomacy and cooperation with a wide range of partners, including other governments,
international institutions, and non-governmental organizations. Prevention of crises,
through the proactive use of such diplomatic, economic, political and military presence
tools, will not only save lives but also will prevent a much greater drain of fiscal resources
than its alternative -- managing conﬁict.

Advancing American Values

The protection of national interests is not the sole factor behind the various expressions
of U.S. national resolve. Since the beginning of our democracy, our policies and actions
have also been guided by our core values -- political and economic freedom, respect for
human rights, and the rule of law. In keeping with these values, we have lent our
encouragement, support, and assistance to those nations and peoples that freely desire
to achieve those same blessings of liberty. Pursuing policies that are guided by these
values, and the open economic and political processes through which they are typically
manifested, will in the long term strengthen international peace and stability, and
reinforce the positive aspects of globalization.

Where Interests Meet Values

There are times when the nexus of our interests and values exists in a compelling
combination that demands action -- diplomatic, economic, or military. At times throughout
our history, our survival as a nation has been at stake and military action was the only
possible recourse. On other occasions, our survival as a nation has not been at stake but
our national interests have nonetheless been challenged. When such challenges to our
interests occur in concert with morally compelling challenges to our values, the American
people expect their government to take action. During the course of this Administration,
we have employed military force only in circumstances in which our national interests
were at stake and our values were challenged.

Preserving our interests and values has never been without cost, and every generation
has been asked to bear a portion of the price of freedom. From a bridge at Concord over
two centuries ago to the air over Kosovo last year, on numerous occasions Americans
have been called upon to stand up for their interests, interests which are often
inextricably linked with their values.

Today, 250,000 U.S. forces are stationed or deployed overseas to protect and advance
our nation's interests and values -- down from a Cold War peak of 500,000. Of this, we
maintain a continuous overseas presence of over 200,000 in places like Germany,
Japan, and South Korea, while about 30,000 are currently involved in operations. These
include nearly 20,000 stationed around the Persian Gulf to contain Iraq, roughly 10,000 in
Bosnia and Kosovo, and 1,000 in the Sinai. Otherforces, such as those rotationally
deployed to the Mediterranean, the Paciﬁc Ocean and the Arabian Gulf, remain involved
in routine operations. Our diplomatic corps -- the Civil and Foreign Services -- also bear
an important part of protecting and advancing our interests, often in the furthest reaches
of the globe, through embassies, consulates, and missions worldwide.

The Efficacy of Engagement

Our strategy of engagement has allowed us to accrue a range of benefits, including
sustained, relative peace, expanded trade and investment opportunities brought by
globalization, and a large increase in the number of states that share our democratic
values. We have exercised strong leadership in the international community to shape the
international security environment in ways that promote peace, stability, prosperity, and
democratic governance. We have transformed our alliances and reinvigorated
relationships with friends and partners; forged broad relationships with former
adversaries; fostered new relations with transitional states; and deterred major hostilities.

Enhancing Our Security at Home and Abroad

There are clear indicators that engagement is achieving our national security goals in this
rapidly changing world. First, engagement has produced many benefits that enhance our
security at home and abroad. The overseas presence of our military forces helps deter or
even prevent conﬁict. It assures our allies of our support and displays our resolve to
potential enemies. It allows for maximum military cooperation with our allies and therefore
encourages burdensharing. FonNard-deployed forces permit us to identify emerging
security problems, and then facilitate a swift response, if necessary. Ongoing operations
in Southwest Asia and Southeastern Europe have improved the current security
environment by ensuring that a return to peace is sustained. Our new embassies in the

countries of the former Soviet Union, and in some 140 other countries, allow the U.S. to
advance America's interests and values in real time, and to immediately detect
opportunities and challenges to these interests. Other aspects of our engagement
policies, such as non-proliferation programs like the Expanded Threat Reduction Initiative
(ETRI), have, within the framework of START 1, stabilized the security environment. Over
5,000 nuclear warheads, 600 missile launchers, 540 land-based and submarine launched
inter-continental ballistic missiles, 64 heavy bombers, and 15 missile submarines have
been deactivated and potential proliferation of WMD or their delivery means averted.
These efforts have made the world a much safer place.

We have also seen international engagement enhance our ability to address asymmetric
threats to our security, such as acts of terrorism and the desired procurement and use of
WMD by potential regional aggressors. International counterterrorism cooperation, for
example, led to the pre-emptive arrest of individuals planning to terrorize Americans at
home and abroad celebrating the Millennium. Engagement efforts have already
assembled an impressive record of international cooperation to harmonize legislation on
terrorist offenses, conduct research and development, and create databases on
terrorism. Strong U.S. overseas presence and engagement, enhanced by a network of
multilateral agreements and arrangements, has enabled us to contain the proliferation of
nuclear, biological, and chemical weapons and their means of delivery by potential
regional aggressors. Inspections done at point of origin for goods destined for the U.S.
improves our nonproliferation and border security efforts and even enhances cargo
throughput. In other cases, it has actually interrupted the flow of sensitive goods to those
countries. Robust engagement in support of law enforcement efforts of partner nations
has resulted in the dismantling of a number of major drug trafficking organizations and
the interdiction of significant quantities of elicit [sic] drugs that would otherwise have
reached U.S. or other consumer markets. Together, efforts that focus on asymmetric
threats to our security will reduce our potential vulnerability despite an increasingly inter-
connected world.

Economic Beneﬁts that Promote Prosperity

Engagement has had clear economic beneﬁts that promote prosperity around the globe.
This strategy provides stability to the world economic system on which the U.S. economy
depends. Our involvement in international economic organizations like the G-8, G-20,
World Trade Organization (V\lTO) and Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD) has helped build stable, resilient global economic and ﬁnancial
systems that promote strong, global prosperity. The U.S. - China Bilateral V\lTO
agreement, for example, will reduce China's tariffs on U.S. priority agricultural products
from an average of 31 % to 14%. It will reduce similar tariffs on U.S. industrial products
from 24.6% to 9.4%. Such agreements expand U.S. market access and bring new goods
and services to these markets at lower cost. Overall, the Administration has concluded
304 trade agreements, and created a series of new fora for economic dialogue, that now
include the Asia Paciﬁc Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum, the Transatlantic
Economic Partnership, and the ongoing development work on the Free Trade Area of the
Americas (FTAA). This has led to numerous economic and financial agreements/reforms
in international institutions that bring stability to the global marketplace that is so essential
for America's economic health and economic security. As a result, total U.S. exports of
goods and services have grown by over 75% since 1992. Measures to strengthen the
architecture of the international financial system, including through increased
transparency and reform of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and World Bank, have
helped put the international economy on a sound footing after recent financial crises and
build a stronger global financial system. In addition, V\lTO agreements to strengthen and
expand trade in information technology goods, financial services, basic

telecommunications services, and electronic commerce have secured open markets in
sectors key to American economic vitality, and laid the groundwork for future
liberalization in agriculture, services, and other areas.

Military presence and engagement activities can also provide similar economic stability.
Our naval presence ensures that international waters, the sea lines of communication,
and ports remain open to commercial shipping, and our ground, air, and naval forces in
Southwest Asia deter threats to the free flow of Middle East oil. The clearest and longest
standing example of what overseas presence can do for economic stability is found in the
sizeable U.S. military force found on the Korean peninsula since 1953. Currently 37,000
strong, U.S. forces have helped the South Koreans rebuild and grow, and now both sides
support the continued presence of U.S. forces as a measure of stability. U.S. actions that
protect the free flow of natural resources and finished goods provide an environment for
sustained economic productivity. Engagement, through military, diplomatic, or other
governmental entities, also enables rapid response to computer network incidents and
attacks that harm our economy. International government-to-government cooperation, for
example, led to the law enforcement action that deﬁnitively determined the source of
some of the distributed, denial of service attacks in February 2000.

Promoting Democracy and Human Rights

Finally, engagement has had political and diplomatic benefits that promote democracy
and human rights. Our policies bring our country's strengths directly to international
publics, governments, and militaries, with the hope that this exposure may inspire others
to promote democracy and the free market. Whether we're advising foreign governments
on the conduct of free elections, teaching foreign troops about the importance of civilian
control of the military, aiding international relief agencies in the wake of natural disasters,
or in the diplomatic day-to-day efforts of our diplomats in 273 missions around the world,
an engaged America brings its values to the world's doorstep. For example, the multi-
faceted program for engagement in Africa is having a clear impact on the cultivation of
democracy on the continent. From Kampala to Cape Town, from Dakar to Dar-es-
Salaam, Africans have new hopes for democracy, peace, and prosperity. Although many
challenges yet remain, visible change is occurring. Through our diplomatic missions, over
20 nations across Africa have requested and are receiving assistance to develop
judiciary, legal, media, and civil society systems to build necessary institutions to sustain
democratic ideals. We are assisting democratic transitions in Nigeria and South Africa.

In our own hemisphere, our engagement efforts have promoted free and fair elections
throughout the hemisphere. In Southeast Europe, the Dayton Accords have sustained the
peace in Bosnia, permitted a civil society with opposition parties and non-governmental
organizations to take root, begun reforms of police and court systems, and allowed
national and local elections to take place. The transformation is not complete and
progress is not irreversible, but it is unmistakable. The best role model is a visible one.

In summary, a strategy of engagement reaps significant benefits for our Nation -- benefits
that actively support our goals of security, prosperity and democracy, yet always remain
in consonance with our principles of protecting our national interests and advancing our
values. Indeed, there is no other viable policy choice in this global era.

ll. Implementing the Strategy

Into the 21st century, the United States must continue to adapt to changes brought by
globalization such that we foster close cooperative relations with the world's most
influential nations while preserving our ability to shape those nations capable of having
an adverse effect upon our well-being and way of life. A stable, peaceful international
security environment is the desired endstate -- one in which our nation, citizens and
interests are not threatened. It is important that we work to enhance the health and safety
of our citizens by promoting a cleaner global environment and effective strategies to
combat infectious disease. We must work to ensure that the United States continues to
prosper through increasingly open international markets and sustainable growth in the
global economy, and that democratic values, respect for human rights, and the rule of law
are increasingly accepted.

Chapter II describes how we intend to utilize the instruments at our disposal to implement
our strategy for engagement and, in the process, achieve the goals of security,
prosperity, and democracy -- our vision for ourselves and others in the 21st century.

Enhancing Security at Home and Abroad

Our strategy for enhancing U.S. security has three principal elements: shaping the
international security environment, responding to threats and crises, and preparing for an
uncertain future.

Shaping the International Environment

The United States seeks to shape the international environment through a variety of
means, including diplomacy, economic cooperation, international assistance, arms
control and nonproliferation efforts, military presence and engagement activities, and
global health initiatives. These activities enhance U.S. security by promoting regional
security; enhancing economic progress; supporting military activities abroad, international
law enforcement cooperation, and environmental efforts; and preventing, reducing or
deterring the diverse threats we face today. These measures adapt and strengthen
alliances and friendships, maintain U.S. influence in key regions, and encourage
adherence to international norms.

The U.S. intelligence community provides various Federal agencies with critical support
for the full range of our involvement abroad. Comprehensive collection and analytic
capabilities are needed to provide warning of threats to U.S. national security, give
analytical support to the policy, law enforcement, and military communities, enable near-
real time intelligence while retaining global perspective, identify opportunities for
advancing our national interests, and maintain our information advantage in the
international arena. We place the highest priority on monitoring the most serious threats
to U.S. security. These include countries or other entities potentially hostile to the United
States; proliferation of nuclear, biological, and chemical weapons and their means of
delivery; other transnational threats, including terrorism, drug trafficking, proliferation of
small arms and light weapons, other international crime, and potential threats to our
critical infrastructure such as computer network attack; potential regional conflicts that
might affect U.S. national security interests; illegal economic or uncontrolled refugee
migration; and threats to U.S. forces and citizens abroad.

Diplomacy

Active diplomacy is critical to advancing our national security. The work of our missions
and representatives around the world serves a number of shaping functions. Examples
include adapting alliances, as the State and Defense Departments do when they work to
ensure that NATO "candidate" militaries will be interoperable with those of current NATO
members; deterring aggression, mediating disputes, and resolving conflicts as shown by
our efforts to dampen the momentum to conﬁict in South Asia and the Middle East;
promoting the trade and investment opportunities that increase U.S. economic prosperity;
and confronting new threats.

While crisis management is an important foreign policy function, crisis prevention is far
preferable. Throughout the 1990s, the United States has most frequently chosen a policy
of preventive diplomacy to avert conflict as well as humanitarian and other emergencies.
Bringing disputing parties to the table is less costly in lives and resources than separating
warring parties; helping failing states is less burdensome than rebuilding failed states;
and feeding the hungry is far more effective and easier than treating victims of diseases
wrought by malnutrition.

Our diplomatic efforts are often multilateral. Consistent with our global leadership role, it
is incumbent upon the United States to maintain its financial and political support for
international institutions such as the United Nations, the International Monetary Fund, the
World Bank, and the World Trade Organization. We must continue to work to ensure we
meet our ﬁnancial obligations to international organizations.

Likewise, domestically, we must remain committed to supporting the State Department,
the U.S. Agency for International Development, the Peace Corps, and other vehicles of
U.S. diplomacy. Our diplomatic infrastructure must be updated to meet critical
productivity and information age requirements to effectively serve our diplomatic and
consular efforts worldwide. Modernization of embassies, consulates, and our diplomatic
telecommunications and information infrastructure is essential to advancing and
protecting vital national interests overseas. Our embassies and consulates host critical
elements of peacetime power: diplomatic personnel, commercial, defense, and legal
attaches, and consular and security officers dedicated to protecting Americans at home
and abroad. Our commitment in properly resourcing these modernization plans is
essential if we are to have the future diplomatic infrastructure capable of supporting and
enhancing our leadership role worldwide.

Such enhancements to our diplomatic infrastructure will also help attract a new
generation of professionals whose skill, dedication, and creativity are at the heart of our
ability to use diplomacy to protect American interests. To both attract and retain these
individuals, we must take every measure to keep our personnel safe overseas. The State
Department is therefore implementing a broad program of security enhancements in
response to continued threats of terrorism directed at U.S. diplomatic and consular
facilities overseas. The investment is warranted. The cost to sustain and protect the
diplomatic components of our peacetime power is a tiny fraction of the price associated
with the crises averted by their presence.

Public Diplomacy

We have an obligation and opportunity to harness the tools of public diplomacy to
advance U.S. leadership around the world by engaging international publics on U.S.
principles and policies. The global advance of individual freedom and information
technologies like the Internet has increased the ability of citizens and organizations to

influence the policies of governments to an unprecedented extent. This makes our public
diplomacy -- efforts to transmit information and messages to peoples around the world --
an increasingly vital component of our national security strategy. Our programs enhance
our nation's ability to inform and inﬁuence foreign publics in support of our national
interests, and broaden the dialogue between U.S. citizens and institutions and their
counterparts abroad. Some even improve mutual understanding by reaching out to future
leaders and inform the opinions of current leaders through academic, professional, and
cultural exchanges. Successful diplomatic relations between the United States and other
countries depend upon establishing trust and creating credible partnerships based on this
trust.

Effective use of our nation's information capabilities to counter misinformation and
incitement, mitigate inter-ethnic conflict, promote independent media organizations and
the free flow of information, and support democratic participation helps advance U.S.
interests abroad. International Public Information activities, as defined by Presidential
Decision Directive 68 (PDD-68), are designed to improve our capability to coordinate
independent public diplomacy, public affairs and other national security information-
related efforts to ensure they are more successfully integrated into foreign and national
security policy making and execution.

International Assistance

The United States has a history of providing generous foreign assistance in an effort to
promote global stability. From the Marshall Plan to the present, our foreign assistance
has expanded free markets, promoted democracy and human rights, contained major
health threats, encouraged sustainable global population growth, promoted
environmental protection, and defused humanitarian crises.

Expanding debt relief is a key element of our international assistance agenda. In 1999,
the G-8 agreed to a reduction in bilateral debt between member countries and Heavily
lndebted Poor Countries (HIPC). This effort encourages international financial institutions
to link debt reduction to other efforts to alleviate poverty, promote economic
development, and thereby create stronger partners around the world for trade and
investment, security, and democracy. To show our commitment to this agreement we
have stood ﬁrmly behind efforts to provide 100% debt relief in countries where the funds
being used to service bilateral debt will finance the basic human needs of a population.

The United States intends that these nations not be left behind, instead joining in the
positive economic prosperity made possible through participation in the international
economic community. Our role in the World Bank and other multilateral development
banks supports mutual goals to provide developing countries with the ﬁnancial and
technical assistance necessary to assimilate them into the global economy. Such efforts
lift peoples out of poverty, and typically result in substantial growth of U.S. exports to the
aided countries.

Finally, our philanthropic history is such that we routinely act to mitigate human suffering
in the wake of both natural and man-made disasters. From the U.S. Agency for
International Development's disaster assistance and food aid, to the State Department's
refugee assistance, to grants to non-governmental relief organizations, to the Defense
Department's Humanitarian Assistance Program, the United States has found multiple
avenues to relieve the suffering of disaster victims worldwide with coordinated targeted
relief efforts.

Arms Control and Nonproliferation

Arms control and nonproliferation initiatives are an essential element of our national
security strategy of enhancing security at home and abroad. They closely complement
and strengthen our efforts to defend our nation through our own military strength while
seeking to make the world a less dangerous place. We pursue verifiable arms control and
nonproliferation agreements that support our efforts to prevent the spread and use of
NBC weapons, materials, expertise, and means of delivery; halt the use of conventional
weapons that cause unnecessary suffering; and contribute to regional stability at lower
levels of armaments. In addition, by increasing transparency in the size, structure and
operations of military forces and building confidence in the intentions of other countries,
arms control agreements and confidence-building measures constrain inventories of
dangerous weapons, reduce incentives and opportunities to initiate an attack, reduce the
mutual suspicions that arise from and spur on armaments competition, and help provide
the assurance of security necessary to strengthen cooperative relationships and direct
resources to safer, more productive endeavors.

Verifiable reductions in strategic offensive arms and the steady shift toward less
destabilizing systems remain essential to our strategy. The START I Treaty's entry into
force in December 1994 charted the course for reductions in the deployed strategic
nuclear forces of the United States and the former Soviet Union. The other countries of
the former Soviet Union, besides Russia, that had nuclear weapons on their soil --
Belarus, Kazakhstan and Ukraine -- have become non-nuclear weapons states under the
Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty (NPT). If the START II Treaty enters into force, the
United States and Russia will each be limited to 3,000 to 3,500 strategic nuclear
weapons. START II also will prohibit land-based missiles from being deployed with more
than one warhead and eliminate heavy land-based missiles entirely. On September 26,
1997, the United States and Russia signed a START II Protocol extending the end date
for reductions to 2007, and exchanged letters on early deactivation by 2003 of those
strategic nuclear delivery systems to be eliminated by 2007. The Senate approved the
ratification of START II in January 1996; the Duma ratified the START II Treaty and the
1997 START II Protocol in April 2000.

At the Helsinki Summit in March 1997, Presidents Clinton and Yeltsin agreed to START
Ill guidelines that, if adopted, will cap the number of strategic nuclear warheads deployed
in each country at 2,000 - 2,500 by the end of 2007 -- reducing both our arsenals by 80%
from Cold War heights. They also agreed that, in order to promote the irreversibility of
deep reductions, a START Ill agreement will include measures relating to the
transparency of strategic nuclear warhead inventories and the destruction of strategic
nuclear warheads. In addition, the Presidents agreed to explore possible conﬁdence-
building and transparency measures relating to nuclear long-range, sea-launched cruise
missiles and tactical nuclear systems.

The Anti-Ballistic Missile (ABM) Treaty remains a cornerstone of strategic stability, and
the United States is committed to continue efforts to enhance the Treaty's viability and
effectiveness. On September 26, 1997, representatives of the United States, Russia,
Belarus, Kazakhstan and Ukraine signed or initialed ﬁve agreements relating to the ABM
Treaty. At the Cologne G-8 Summit in June 1999, Presidents Clinton and Yeltsin
reiterated their determination to achieve earliest possible ratification and entry into force
of those agreements. The two presidents also reaffirmed at Cologne their existing
obligations under Article Xlll of the ABM Treaty to consider possible changes in the
strategic situation that have a bearing on the ABM Treaty and, as appropriate, possible
proposals for further increasing the viability of the Treaty. They also agreed to begin
discussions on the ABM Treaty in parallel with discussions on START Ill. The United
States has proposed that the ABM Treaty be modified to accommodate possible
deployment of a limited National Missile Defense (NMD) system that would counter new

threats by states that threaten international peace and security while preserving strategic
stability.

At the June 4, 2000, Moscow summit, Presidents Clinton and Putin signed a Joint
Statement of Principles on Strategic Stability. The Principles state that the international
community faces a dangerous and growing threat of proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction and their means of delivery, including missiles and missile technologies, and
that there is a need to address these threats. The Principles recalled the existing
provisions of the ABM Treaty, to consider changes in the strategic situation that have a
bearing on the provisions of the treaty, and, as appropriate, to consider possible
proposals for further increasing the viability of the Treaty. The Principles also record
agreement to intensify discussions on both ABM issues and START Ill.

The United States has also made clear to Russia that we are prepared to engage in
serious cooperation to address the emerging ballistic missile threat, and we have
identified a number of speciﬁc ideas for discussion. At the same June 4, 2000, Moscow
Summit, Presidents Clinton and Putin signed an agreement to establish a Joint Center for
exchanging early warning data on ballistic missile launches. The agreement will
signiﬁcantly reduce the danger that ballistic missiles could be launched inadvertently on
false warning of attack. It will also promote increased mutual confidence in the
capabilities of the ballistic missile early warning systems of both sides. The Presidents
also agreed to explore more far-reaching cooperation to address missile threats.

On July 21, 2000, in Okinawa, Presidents Clinton and Putin issued a Joint Statement on
Cooperation on Strategic Stability, which identifies specific areas and projects for
cooperation to control the spread of missiles, missile technology, and weapons of mass
destruction. On September 6, 2000, in New York, Presidents Clinton and Putin signed a
Joint Statement on the Strategic Stability Cooperation Initiative and Implementation Plan,
which provides further detail and an agreed timetable for pursuing cooperation in these
areas, including the establishment of a ballistic missile and space launch vehicle pre-
launch notification regime in which other states would be invited to participate. Most
recently, the United States and Russia signed a bilateral pre-launch notiﬁcation
agreement on December 16, 2000.

To be secure, we must not only have a strong military; we must also take the lead in
building a safer, more responsible world. We have a fundamental responsibility to limit
the spread of nuclear weapons and reduce the danger of nuclear war. To this end, the
United States remains committed to bringing the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban
Treaty (CTBT) into force.

To date, 160 countries have signed -- and 68 have ratiﬁed -- the Treaty prohibiting all
nuclear explosions. The 68 include 31 of the 44 countries named in the Treaty whose
ratification is necessary for entry into force. The CTBT will, in effect, constrain nuclear
weapons development. The United States ended nuclear testing eight years ago; upon
entry into force, the CTBT will require other state entities to also refrain from testing. We
are confident in the safety and reliability of the U.S. nuclear stockpile, and we are
confident that a fully supported and sustained stockpile stewardship program will enable
us to continue to maintain America's nuclear deterrent capability. However, if we find we
cannot, we would have the option of using our supreme national interest withdrawal rights
under the Treaty in order to conduct whatever nuclear testing is necessary.

The CTBT will put in place a worldwide network of sensors for detecting nuclear
explosions. V\ﬁth over 300 stations around the globe -- including 31 in Russia, 11 in
China, and 17 in the Middle East -- this international monitoring system will improve our
ability to monitor nuclear explosions and catch cheaters. The United States already has

dozens of monitoring stations of its own; the CTBT will allow us to take advantage of
other countries‘ stations, while also creating new ones. The Treaty also will give us the
right to request on-site inspections of sites in other countries where nuclear tests are
suspected to have taken place.

As a matter of policy, the United States will maintain its moratorium on nuclear testing,
pending entry into force of the CTBT, and we are encouraging all other states to do the
same. We are also encouraging all states that have not signed and ratified the CTBT to
do so. Despite the unfortunate rejection of the CTBT by the U.S. Senate, we remain
committed to obtaining Senate advice and consent for ratiﬁcation of this treaty. United
States ratiﬁcation will encourage other states to ratify, enable the United States to lead
the international effort to gain CTBT entry into force, and strengthen international norms
against nuclear testing. Simply stated, the United States must be prepared to lead by
example.

The NPT, the cornerstone of international nuclear nonproliferation regime, reinforces
regional and global security by creating and sustaining confidence in the non-nuclear
commitments of its parties. It was an indispensable precondition for the denuclearization
of Ukraine, Kazakhstan, Belarus and South Africa. We seek to ensure that the NPT
remains a strong and vital element of global security by achieving universal adherence
and full compliance by its parties with their Treaty obligations. A Review Conference held
in May 2000, the ﬁrst in fifteen years with a consensus document, strengthened the
global nuclear nonproliferation norm and demonstrated that support for this critical Treaty
is broad and deep. We won our case by vigorously promoting the value of the NPT in
preventing the spread of nuclear weapons while continuing policies designed to reduce
U.S. reliance on nuclear weapons and to work for their ultimate elimination.

The safeguards system of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) is an essential
component of the nuclear nonproliferation regime. We seek widespread adoption of the
|AEA's strengthened safeguards system and to ensure that the IAEA has the resources
necessary to fulfill its obligations. We are working to amend the Convention on the
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material to ensure that its standards cover national
activities as well as international transfers of nuclear material, which complements our
effort to enhance IAEA safeguards. We also seek the immediate commencement of
negotiations to achieve a Fissile Material Cutoff Treaty at the Geneva Conference on
Disarmament. Halting production of ﬁssile materials for nuclear explosions would cap the
supply of nuclear materials available worldwide for weapons, a key step in halting the
spread of nuclear weapons. A coordinated effort by the intelligence community and law
enforcement agencies to detect, prevent, and deter illegal trafficking in ﬁssile materials is
essential to our counterproliferation efforts. So is the Material Protection, Control and
Accounting program, which enhances security for former Soviet nuclear materials and
helps prevent them from ending up in the hands of terrorists or proliferant states. We also
recognize that nuclear weapon free zone treaties and protocols that conform with long-
standing U.S. criteria can also advance nuclear nonproliferation goals.

Through the Nunn-Lugar Cooperative Threat Reduction (CTR) Program and other
initiatives, we aim to strengthen controls over weapons-usable ﬁssile material and
prevent the theft or diversion of NBC weapons and related material and technology from
the former Soviet Union. The CTR Program has effectively supported enhanced safety,
security, accounting, and centralized control measures for nuclear weapons and ﬁssile
materials in the former Soviet Union. It has assisted Ukraine, Kazakhstan and Belarus in
becoming non-nuclear weapons states and will continue to assist Russia in meeting its
START obligations. The CTR Program is also supporting measures to eliminate and
prevent the proliferation of chemical weapons and biological weapon-related capabilities,

and it has supported many ongoing military reductions and reform measures in the
former Soviet Union.

The Nonproliferation and Disarmament Fund (NDF) is a sharply focused fund to permit
rapid response to unanticipated, high priority requirements or opportunities to: 1) halt the
spread of WMD, their delivery systems, and related technology; 2) limit the spread of
advanced conventional weapons and related technology; and 3) eliminate existing
weapons. NDF activities in Central Europe and the NIS have included the elimination of
SCUD and SS-23 missiles, the procurement of HEU, the development and deployment of
automated systems to license and track sensitive technologies, and the acquisition of
nuclear material detection equipment.

In 1999, the President launched the Expanded Threat Reduction Initiative (ETRI). This
effort is designed to address the new security challenges in Russia and the other Newly
Independent States (NIS) caused by that year's financial crisis, including preventing the
proliferation of NBC weapons, reducing the threat posed by residual NBC weapons, and
stabilizing the military. This initiative builds on the success of existing programs, such as
the CTR program, the Material Protection, Control and Accounting program, and the
Science Centers. A new component of our nuclear security program will greatly enhance
the security of ﬁssile material by concentrating it at fewer, well-protected sites, and new
programs will increase the security of facilities and experts formerly associated with the
Soviet Union's biological weapons effort.

At the June 4, 2000, Clinton-Putin summit, the United States and Russia reached
agreement on the management and disposition of plutonium designated as no longer
required for defense purposes. The agreement entered into force after Prime Minister
Kasyanov and Vice President Gore signed it on September 1, 2000. Under the
agreement, each government commits to irreversibly transform 34 metric tons of excess
weapon-grade plutonium to a form that will be unusable for weapons. The agreement
establishes the goals, timelines, and conditions for ensuring that this plutonium can never
again be used for weapons or any other military purposes.

Implementation of the Plutonium Management and Disposition Agreement is contingent
on sufﬁcient international assistance for the Russian program. At the Okinawa G-8
Summit in July 2000, leaders took an additional step to this end. The final communiqué
stated that their goal for the next summit is to develop an international financing plan for
plutonium management and disposition based on a detailed project plan, and a
multilateral framework to coordinate this cooperation. They also committed to expand
cooperation to other interested countries beyond the G-8 in order to gain the widest
possible international support, and to explore the potential for both public and private
funding.

Over the past year, the United States Government provided leadership for the multilateral
cooperation effort, particularly in the context of an informal G-8 working group, which
coordinated with the G-8 Nonproliferation Experts Group. (N PEG). Preparations for the
Genoa summit will be under the auspices of a formally established Plutonium Disposition
Planning Group to be co-chaired by the United States and the Russian Federation. We
are purchasing tons of highly enriched uranium from dismantled Russian nuclear
weapons for conversion into commercial reactor fuel. We are helping redirect dozens of
former Soviet NBC facilities and tens of thousands of former NBC scientists in Eurasia
from military activities to beneﬁcial civilian research.

In support of U.S. efforts to prevent proliferation of NBC expertise and materials in the
NIS, Eastern Europe, and across borders, the Departments of Defense, Energy, and
Commerce, the U.S. Customs Service, and the FBI are engaging in programs that assist

governments in developing effective export control systems and in developing capabilities
to prevent, deter, or detect such proliferation. These programs provide training,
equipment, advice, and services to law enforcement and border security agencies in
these countries.

We seek to strengthen the Biological Weapons Convention (BWC) with a new
international regime to enhance compliance. We are also working hard to implement and
enforce the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC). The United States Congress
underscored the importance of these efforts in October 1998 by passing implementing
legislation. In late 1999, the Executive Order (EO 13128), Presidential Decision Directive
(PDD-70), and two new regulations were completed, enabling the United States to submit
commercial declarations and commence commercial facility inspections in the middle of
2000.

The Administration also seeks to prevent destabilizing buildups of conventional arms and
to limit access to sensitive technical information, equipment, and technologies by
strengthening international regimes, including the Wassenaar Arrangement on Export
Controls for Conventional Arms and Dual-Use Goods and Technologies, the Australia
Group (for chemical and biological weapons), the Missile Technology Control Regime,
the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG), and the Zangger Committee (NSG and Zangger
ensure that IAEA safeguards are applied to nuclear exports). At the NATO 50th
Anniversary Summit, Allied leaders agreed to enhance NATO's ability to deal both
politically and militarily with the proliferation of WMD and the means of their delivery. To
this end, we have worked with our Alliance partners to establish the NATO WMD Center
and to promote invigorated discussions of nonproliferation issues in the NATO Senior
Political Military and Defense Groups on Proliferation.

Regional nonproliferation efforts are particularly important in three critical proliferation
zones: the Korean Peninsula, Southwest Asia, and South Asia. On the Korean Peninsula,
we are implementing the 1994 Agreed Framework, which requires full compliance by
North Korea to live up to its nuclear nonproliferation obligations. We also seek to
convince North Korea to halt its indigenous missile program and exports of missile
systems and technologies; something emphasized during a November 2000 visit to
Pyongyang by the Secretary of State. In the Middle East and Southwest Asia, we
encourage regional confidence-building measures and arms control agreements that
address the legitimate security concerns of all parties. We continue efforts to thwart and
roll back both Iran's development of NBC weapons and long-range missiles, and also
Iraq's efforts to reconstitute its NBC programs. In South Asia, we seekto persuade India
and Pakistan to refrain from weaponizing or deploying nuclear weapons, testing or
deploying missiles capable of delivering nuclear weapons, and further producing ﬁssile
material for nuclear weapons. We also urge India and Pakistan to adhere fully to
international nonproliferation standards and to sign and ratify the CTBT.

Over the past three years, the United States has worked to ensure that the landmark
1990 Conventional Armed Forces in Europe (CFE) Treaty remains a cornerstone of
European peace, security and stability into the 21st century. On November 19, 1999, we
joined the other 29 CFE States Parties in signing an Adaptation Agreement that
eliminates obsolete bloc-to-bloc limits and replaces them with a system of national and
territorial ceilings. It will also enhance transparency through more information and
inspections, strengthen requirements for host nation consent to the presence of foreign
forces, and open the treaty to accession by other European nations. The accompanying
CFE Final Act reﬁects a number of important political commitments, including
agreements on the complete withdrawal of Russian armed forces from Moldova and
partial withdrawal of Russian forces from Georgia.

The United States is a world leader in the effort to curb the harmful proliferation and
destabilizing accumulation of small arms and light weapons (SA/LVV) such as automatic
rifles, machine guns, rocket-propelled grenades, light mortars and man-portable anti-
aircraft missiles. Inexpensive, widely available, and easy to use, these weapons
exacerbate regional conﬁicts, expand casualties, increase crime, and hinder economic
development. They can jeopardize the safety of peacekeepers, potentially putting U.S.
Forces at risk.

To reduce this threat, the United States is urging countries to adopt effective export
controls, brokering regulations, permanent marking, anti-smuggling measures, and
embargo enforcement. Global efforts focus on securing a Firearms Protocol to the UN
Transnational Organized Crime Convention and seeking international agreement through
the UN 2001 Conference on Illicit Trafﬁcking in SA/LW. The United States also works
with regional partners in the OSCE, NATO/EAPC, OAS, OAU, the ASEAN Regional
Forum, and elsewhere. The United States provides some technical assistance to
countries trying to prevent SA/LW trafficking and actively supports efforts to destroy
excess stocks of SA/LW worldwide, often partnering with like-minded countries such as
Norway.

The United States is also committed to ending the threat to innocent civilians from anti-
personnel landmines (APLs). We have already taken major steps toward this goal while
ensuring our ability to meet international obligations and provide for the safety and
security of our men and women in uniform. President Clinton has directed the Defense
Department to end the use of all APLs, including self-destructing APLs, outside Korea by
2003 and to pursue aggressively the objective of having APL alternatives ready for Korea
by 2006. We are also aggressively pursuing alternatives to our mixed anti-tank systems
that contain anti-personnel submunitions. We have made clear that the United States will
sign the Ottawa Convention by 2006 if by then we have succeeded in identifying and
fielding suitable alternatives to our self-destructing APLs and mixed anti-tank systems.

In May 1999, we gained Senate advice and consent to ratiﬁcation of the Amended Mines
Protocol to the Convention on Conventional Weapons. This agreement addresses the
worldwide humanitarian problem caused by APLs by banning the use of non-detectable
APLs and severely limiting the use of long-duration APLs to clearly marked and
monitored fields that effectively keep out civilians. We have established a permanent ban
on APL exports and are seeking to universalize an export ban through the Conference on
Disarmament in Geneva. We are supporting humanitarian demining programs worldwide
through engagement with mine-afflicted nations and the international community. We
have taken a lead role in establishing the International Test and Evaluation Program,
through which nations will develop agreed standards and test procedures for various
pieces of demining equipment and will then test against those standards. To date, the
United States has provided over $400 million through the

U.S. Humanitarian Demining Program. The Demining 2010 Initiative, which is
independent of the Humanitarian Demining Program, advocates increased efforts in the
United States and abroad and develops public-private partnerships to support these
programs.

The effectiveness of the panoply of arms control agreements described above, as well as
that of our nonproliferation activities, rests on maintaining and enhancing our monitoring
capabilities. We must keep ahead of potential attempts by others at denial and deception.
To do so, we must maintain current monitoring assets and have a vigorous research and
development program that will translate new technologies into enhanced capabilities.
These efforts will increase our conﬁdence in the viability of existing agreements and
enable us to conclude new ones to further decrease the risks of armed conflicts.

Milita Activities

The U.S. military is a very visible and critical pillar of our effort to shape the international
security environment in ways that protect and promote U.S. interests. It is not, however, a
substitute for other forms of engagement, such as diplomatic, economic, scientiﬁc,
technological, cultural, and educational activities. We must always be mindful that the
primary mission of our Armed Forces is to deter and, if necessary, to fight and win
conflicts in which our vital interests are threatened. Through overseas presence and
peacetime engagement activities, such as defense cooperation, security assistance,
regional centers for security studies, training, and exercises with allies and friends, our
Armed Forces help to deter aggression and coercion, build coalitions, promote regional
stability, support the development of indigenous counterdrug law enforcement
capabilities, and serve as role models for militaries in emerging democracies. V\ﬁth
countries that are neither staunch friends nor known foes, military cooperation can serve
as a positive means of building bridges between the military leaderships of different
nations. These links enhance security relationships between the nations today and will
contribute to improved relations tomorrow. At the same time, we also remain ﬁrmly
committed to human rights and we will ensure our military forces do not knowingly train or
assist units that have committed a gross violation of human rights.

Maintaining our overseas presence enhances our understanding of the military
developments within various regions of the world. Relevant observations add to our
larger geo-political understanding of potential areas for instability or threats to our
national interests and help select our optimal avenue of response; diplomatic, economic,
or military. It reassures our allies and promotes regional stability. It gives substance to
our security commitments, helps prevent the development of power vacuums and
instability, and contributes to deterrence by demonstrating our determination to defend
U.S., allied, and friendly interests in critical regions. Having credible combat forces
forward deployed in peacetime also better positions the United States to respond rapidly
to crises, permitting them to be first on the scene. Equally essential is effective global
power projection, which is key to the ﬁexibility demanded of our forces and provides
options for responding to potential crises and conﬁicts even when we have no permanent
presence or a limited infrastructure in a region.

Just as U.S. engagement overall must be selective -- focusing on the threats and
opportunities most relevant to our interests and applying our resources where we can
make the greatest difference -- so too must our use of the Armed Forces for engagement
be equally discerning. Engagement activities must be carefully managed to prevent
erosion of our mi|itary's current and long-term readiness for larger-scale contingencies.
The Defense Department's theater engagement planning process, which was approved
by the President in 1997, helps ensure that military engagement activities are prioritized
within theaters, and balanced against available resources. In short, we must prioritize
military engagement activities to ensure the readiness of our Armed Forces to carry out
crisis response and warﬁghting missions, as well as to ensure that we can sustain an
appropriate level of engagement activities over the long term.

Our ability to deter potential adversaries in peacetime rests on several factors,
particularly on our demonstrated will and ability to uphold our security commitments when
they are challenged. We have earned this reputation through both our declaratory policy,
which clearly communicates costs to potential adversaries, and our credible warﬁghting
capability across the full spectrum of conﬁict. This capability is embodied in four ways;
ready forces and equipment strategically stationed or deployed forward, forces in the
United States at the appropriate level of readiness to deploy when needed, our ability to
maintain access to critical regions and infrastructure overseas, and our demonstrated
ability to form and lead effective military coalitions.

We must continue to improve our program to combat terrorism in the areas of
antiterrorism, counterterrorism, consequence management, and intelligence supportto
deter terrorism. We will deter terrorism through the increased antiterrorism readiness of
our installations and forward forces, enhanced training and awareness of military
personnel, and the development of comprehensive theater engagement plans. In
counterterrorism, because terrorist organizations may not be deterred by traditional
means, we must ensure a robust capability to accurately attribute the source of attacks
against the United States or its citizens, and to respond effectively and decisively to
protect our national interests. U.S. armed forces possess a tailored range of options to
respond to terrorism directed at U.S. citizens, interests, and property. In the event of a
terrorist incident, our consequence management ability to significantly mitigate injury and
damage may likely deter future attacks. Finally, we will continue to improve the timeliness
and accuracy of intelligence support to commanders, which will also enhance our ability
to deter terrorism.

Our nuclear deterrent posture is one example of how U.S. military capabilities are used
effectively to deter aggression and coercion against U.S. interests. Nuclear weapons
serve as a guarantor of our security commitments to allies and a disincentive to those
who would contemplate developing or otherwise acquiring their own WMD capability.
Those who threaten the United States or its allies with WMD should have no doubt that
any such attack would meet an overwhelming and devastating response. Our military
planning for the possible employment of U.S. strategic nuclear weapons is focused on
deterring a nuclear war and it emphasizes the survivability of our nuclear systems,
infrastructure, and command, control, and communications systems necessary to endure
a preemptive attack yet still deliver an overwhelming response. Another key element of
the U.S. nuclear deterrent strategy is ensuring the National Command Authorities have a
survivable and endurable command, control, and communications capability through
which to execute the mission and direct nuclear forces during all phases of a nuclear war.
The United States will continue to maintain a robust triad of strategic nuclear forces
sufficient to deter any potential adversaries who may have or seek access to nuclear
forces -- to convince them that seeking a nuclear advantage or resorting to nuclear
weapons would be futile. In addition, some U.S. non-strategic nuclear forces are forward
deployed in NATO to demonstrate the political commitment of the United States to the
long-term viability of NATO and European security. We must also ensure the continued
viability of the infrastructure that supports U.S. nuclear forces and weapons. The
Stockpile Stewardship Program will provide high conﬁdence in the safety and reliability of
our nuclear weapons under the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty.

The Department of Defense's Counterproliferation Initiative provides another example of
how U.S. military capabilities are used effectively to deter aggression and coercion
against U.S. interests. Under this initiative, we are preparing our own forces and working
with allies to ensure that we can prevail on the battlefield despite the threatened or actual
use of NBC weapons by adversaries.

The United States is committed to preserving internationally recognized freedom of
navigation on -- and overflight of -- the world's oceans, which are critical to the future
strength of our nation and the maintenance of global stability. Freedom of navigation and
overﬁight are essential to our economic security and for the worldwide movement and
sustainment of U.S. military forces. These freedoms are codified in the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea, which the President submitted to the Senate in 1994
for advice and consent to ratiﬁcation. In addition to lending the certainty of the rule of law
to an area critical to our national security, the Convention preserves our leadership in
global ocean policy. Thus, the Law of the Sea Convention buttresses the strategic
advantages that the United States gains from being a global power, and ratification of the
Convention remains a high priority.

Quality people -- civilian and military -- are our most critical asset in implementing our
defense activities. The quality of our men and women in uniform will be the deciding
factor in future military operations where the operation and maintenance of information
systems and advanced technology become ever more important. We must ensure that
we remain the most fully prepared and best trained military force in the world.
Accordingly, we will continue to place the highest priority and bear the costs associated
with programs that support recruiting, retention, quality of life, training, equipping and
educating our personnel.

International Law Enforcement Cooperation

Certain criminal threats to our national security are international in nature. Transnational
threats include terrorism, drug and migrant smuggling, and other international crime. The
rise in the frequency and intensity of these threats makes it incumbent upon U.S. and
foreign law enforcement and judicial authorities to cooperate in an innovative manner.
The President's International Crime Control Strategy prescribes the role of overseas law
enforcement presence in establishing and sustaining working relationships with foreign
law enforcement agencies; keeping crime away from our shores; enabling extradition;
and solving serious U.S. crimes.

The Department of State and U.S. federal law enforcement agencies continue to assist
law enforcement agencies in Central and Eastern Europe and East Asia through
cooperative centers established in Hungary and Thailand known as the International Law
Enforcement Academies (|LEAs). The ILEA initiative is a multinational effort organized by
the United States, the host nations, and other international training partners to provide
mutual assistance and law enforcement training.

Environmental and Health Initiatives

The President has said, "Our natural security must be seen as part of our national
security." Decisions today regarding the environment and natural resources can affect
our security for generations. Environmental threats do not heed national borders;
environmental perils overseas and environmental crime pose long-term dangers to U.S.
security and well being. Natural resource scarcities can trigger and exacerbate conﬁict,
and phenomena such as climate change, toxic pollution, ocean dumping, and ozone
depletion directly threaten the health and well-being of Americans and all other
individuals on Earth.

Responding firmly to environmental threats remains a part of mainstream American
foreign policy. America's leadership was essential for agreement on the Kyoto Protocol --
the first binding agreement among the world's industrialized nations to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions. America also brokered key international agreements on toxic
chemicals -- such as persistent organic pollutants, environmental aspects of
biotechnology, the ozone layer, and endangered marine life. America's insistence on high
environmental standards in its own trade agreements, in international financial
institutions, and in bilateral export credit and development assistance programs similarly
demonstrates to the rest of the international community that growing economies and
clean environments do go hand-in-hand. America also provided leadership in the Global
Environment Facility and in bilateral programs for clean energy development, as well as
conservation of biological diversity and endangered ecosystems such as tropical forests.

V\ﬁth globalization, the free flow of people and goods across national borders continues to
increase rapidly with each passing year. This interdependence has caused diseases and
health risks around the world to become matters of both U.S. national and international

security. The United States promotes international cooperation on health issues because
it reduces the threat of diseases to Americans, and because global international
economic development, democratization, and political stability are predicated in part on
the health of populations worldwide.

Beyond these general concerns, a number of speciﬁc international health issues are
critical for our national security. Because a growing proportion of our national food supply
is coming from international sources, assuring the safety of the food we consume must
be a priority. The Administration has announced new and stronger programs to ensure
the safety of imported as well as domestic foods, to be overseen by the President's
Council on Food Safety. New and emerging infections such as drug-resistant tuberculosis
and the Ebola virus can move with the speed ofjet travel. We are actively engaged with
the international health community as well as the World Health Organization to stop the
spread of these dangerous diseases.

Combating the global epidemic of HIV/AIDS has been a top international health priority in
recent years. AIDS is now the number one cause of death on the continent of Africa. The
United States led the United Nations Security Council in holding its first-ever session on
AIDS in Africa and has committed to efforts to accelerate the development and delivery of
vaccines for AIDS and other diseases that disproportionately affect the developing world.
We also have promoted efforts by African national governments to provide AIDS
awareness education to their military members who travel widely around the continent;
and led the G-8's decision to link debt relief to HIV/AIDS prevention and other such
programs.

Population issues have also been a health priority garnering renewed focus
internationally. The Administration has re-established U.S. leadership on international
population issues by expanding quality reproductive health care. This includes voluntary
family planning services for women and men around the world; improving the political,
economic, and social status of women; and enhancing educational opportunities for
women and girls.

Responding to Threats and Crises

Because our efforts to shape the international environment alone cannot guarantee the
security we seek, the United States must be able to respond at home and abroad to the
full spectrum of threats and crises that may arise. Since our resources are finite, we must
be selective in our responses, focusing on challenges that most directly affect our
interests and engaging when and where we can have the greatest positive impact. We
must use the most appropriate tool or combination of tools -- diplomacy, public
diplomacy, economic measures, law enforcement, intelligence, military operations, and
others. We act in alliance or partnership when others share our interests, but will act
unilaterally when compelling national interests so demand.

Efforts to deter an adversary -- be it an aggressor nation, terrorist group or criminal
organization -- can become the leading edge of crisis response. In this sense, deterrence
straddles the line between shaping the international environment and responding to
crises. Deterrence in crisis generally involves demonstrating the United States‘
commitment to a particular country or interest by enhancing our warﬁghting capability in
the theater. Our forward and rotationally deployed forces are the embodiment of our
continuous commitment to our overseas partners and act as the first line of deterrence,
providing the necessary inroads to access and influence to help defuse crisis situations.

Our ability to respond to the full spectrum of threats requires that we have the best-
trained, best-equipped, most effective armed forces in the world. Our strategy requires
that we have highly capable ground, air, naval, special operations, and space forces
supported by a range of enabling capabilities including strategic mobility and Command,
Control, Communications, Computers, Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance
(C41 SR). Maintaining our superior forces requires developing superior technology, and
exploiting it to the fullest extent.

Strategic mobility is critical to our ability to augment forces already present in the region

with the projection of additional forces for both domestic and international crisis response.

This agility in response is key to successful American leadership and engagement.
Access to sufficient ﬁeets of aircraft, ships, vehicles, and trains, as well as bases, ports,
pre-positioned equipment, and other infrastructure will of course be an imperative if we
are to deploy and sustain U.S. and multinational forces in regions of interest to us.

We are committed to maintaining U.S. preeminence in space. Unimpeded access to and
use of space is a vital national interest -- essential for protecting U.S. national security,
promoting our prosperity, and ensuring our well-being. Consistent with our international
obligations, we will deter threats to our interests in space, counter hostile efforts against
U.S. access to and use of space, and maintain the ability to counter space systems and
services that could be used for hostile purposes against our military forces, command
and control systems, or other critical capabilities. We will maintain our technological
superiority in space systems, and sustain a robust U.S. space industry and a strong,
forward-looking research base. We also will continue efforts to prevent the spread of
weapons of mass destruction to space, and will continue to pursue global partnerships
addressing space-related scientific, economic, environmental, and security issues.

We also are committed to maintaining information superiority -- the capability to collect,
process, and disseminate an uninterrupted ﬁow of information while exploiting and/or
denying an adversary's ability to do the same. Operational readiness, as well as the
command and control of forces, relies increasingly on information systems and
technology. We must keep pace with rapidly evolving information technology so that we
can cultivate and harvest the promise of the knowledge that comes from this information
superiority, sharing that knowledge among U.S. forces and coalition partners while
exploiting the shortfalls in our adversaries‘ information capabilities.

Protecting the Homeland

Emerging threats to our homeland by both state and non-state actors may be more likely
in the future as our potential adversaries strike against vulnerable civilian targets in the
United States to avoid direct confrontation with our military forces. Such acts represent a
new dimension of asymmetric threats to our national security. Easier access to the critical
technical expertise and technologies enables both state and non-state actors to harness
increasingly destructive power with greater ease. In response to such threats, the United
States has embarked on a comprehensive strategy to prevent, deter, disrupt, and when
necessary, effectively respond to the myriad of threats to our homeland that we will face.

National Missile Defense

The Clinton Administration is committed to the development of a limited National Missile
Defense (NMD) system designed to counter the emerging ballistic missile threat from
states that threaten international peace and security. On September 1, 2000, the
President announced that while the technology for NMD was promising, the system as a
whole is not yet proven, and thus he was not prepared to proceed with the deployment of

a limited NMD system. The President has instead asked the Secretary of Defense to
continue a robust program of development and testing. The Administration recognizes
the relationship among the ABM Treaty, strategic stability, and the START process, and
is committed to working with Russia on any modifications to the ABM Treaty required to
deploy a limited NMD. An NMD system, if deployed, would be part ofa larger strategy to
preserve and enhance peace and security.

In making this decision, the President considered the threat, cost, technical feasibility and
impact overall on our national security of proceeding with NMD, including the impact on
arms control and relations with Russia, China, and our allies. He considered a thorough
technical review by the Department of Defense as well as the advice of his top national
security advisors.

The Pentagon has made progress on developing a system that can address the
emerging missile threat. But, at this time, we do not have sufficient information to
conclude that it can work reliably under realistic conditions. Critical elements of the
program, such as the booster rocket for the missile interceptor, have not been tested; and
there are also questions to be resolved about the ability of the system to deal with
countermeasures. The President made clear that we should not move forward until we
have further confidence that the system will work and until we have made every
reasonable diplomatic effort to minimize the international consequences. In the interim,
the Pentagon will continue the development and testing of the NMD system. That effort is
still at an early stage: three of the nineteen, planned intercept tests have been held so
far. Additional ground tests and simulations will also take place.

The development of our NMD is part of the Administration's comprehensive national
security strategy to prevent potential adversaries from acquiring and/or threatening the
United States with such weapons. Arms control agreements with Russia are an important
part of this strategy because they ensure stability and predictability between the United
States and Russia, promote the dismantling of nuclear weapons, and help complete the
transition from confrontation to cooperation with Russia. The 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile
(ABM) Treaty limits anti-missile defenses according to the following principle: neither side
should deploy defenses that would undermine the other's nuclear deterrent, and thus
tempt the other to strike first in a crisis or take countermeasures that would make both
our countries less secure. The President's decision not to deploy a limited NMD system
will provide additional time to pursue with Russia the goal of adapting the ABM Treaty to
permit the deployment of a limited NMD that would not undermine strategic stability. The
United States will also continue to consult with allies and hold dialogues with other states.

In August 1999, President Clinton decided that the initial NMD architecture would include:
100 ground-based interceptors deployed in Alaska, one ABM radar in Alaska, and five
upgraded early warning radar. This approach is the fastest, most affordable, and most
technologically mature approach to fielding an NMD system capable of protecting all 50
states against projected emerging threats.

On July 23, 1999, President Clinton signed H.R. 4, the ''National Missile Defense Act of
1999," stating that it is the policy of the United States to deploy an effective NMD system
as soon as technologically possible. The legislation includes two amendments supported
by the Administration. The first makes clear that any NMD deployment must be subject to
the authorization and appropriations process, and thus that no decision on deployment
has been made. The second amendment states that it is the policy of the United States to
seek continued negotiated reductions in Russian nuclear forces, putting Congress on
record as continuing to support negotiated reductions in strategic nuclear arms,
reaffirming the Administration's position that missile defense policy must take into
account important arms control and nuclear nonproliferation objectives.

Countering Foreign Intelligence Collection

The United States is a primary target of foreign intelligence services due to our military,
scientific, technological and economic preeminence. Foreign intelligence services
aggressively seek information about U.S. political and military intentions and capabilities.
As the rapidity of global technological change accelerates and the gap with some nations
has widened, these countries‘ foreign intelligence agencies are stepping up their efforts
to collect classified or sensitive information on U.S. weapons systems, U.S. intelligence
collection methods, emerging technologies with military applications, and related
technical methods. Such information enables potential adversaries to counter U.S.
political and military objectives, develop sophisticated weapons more quickly and
efficiently, and develop countermeasures against U.S. weapons and related technical
methods. Intelligence collection against U.S. economic, commercial, and proprietary
information enables foreign states and corporations to obtain shortcuts to industrial
development and improve their competitiveness against U.S. corporations in global
markets. Although difficult to quantify, economic and industrial espionage results in the
loss of millions of dollars and thousands ofjobs annually.

To protect sensitive national security information, it is critical for us to effectively counter
the collection efforts of foreign intelligence services and non-state actors through
vigorous counterintelligence efforts and security programs. Over the last six years, we
have created new counterintelligence mechanisms to address economic and industrial
espionage and have implemented procedures to improve coordination among
intelligence, counterintelligence and law enforcement agencies. These measures have
considerably strengthened our ability to counter the foreign intelligence collection threat.
We will continue to refine and enhance our counterintelligence capabilities as we enter
the 21 st century.

Dramatic geopolitical changes that continue into the first decade of the 21 s‘ century
increase rather than lessen the need to protect sensitive national security information.
Some of this information is classiﬁed while some is unclassified but sensitive due to its
relationship to, or impact upon, our critical infrastructure. Increased threats to our cyber
security and the inadvertent or deliberate disclosure of sensitive information underscore
the necessity forthe National Security Community to have reliable, timely, and trusted
information available to those who both need it and are authorized to have it. During the
last ﬁve years we have established a set of security countermeasures policies, practices,
procedures, and programs for a rational, fair, forward looking, and cost-effective security
system. More needs to be done, however, and efforts will continue in providing a better
synchronized, integrated and interoperable programs for personnel security, physical
security, technical security, operational security, education and awareness, information
assurance, classification management, industrial security, and counterintelligence.

Combating Terrorism

The United States has mounted an aggressive response to terrorism. Our strategy
pressures terrorists, deters attacks, and responds forcefully to terrorist acts. It combines
enhanced law enforcement and intelligence efforts; vigorous diplomacy and economic
sanctions; and, when necessary, military force. Domestically, we seek to stop terrorists
before they act, and eliminate their support networks and financing. Overseas, we seek
to eliminate terrorist sanctuaries; counter state and non-governmental support for
terrorism; help other governments improve their physical and political counterterrorism,
antiterrorism, and consequence management efforts; tighten embassy and military facility
security; and protect U.S. citizens living and traveling abroad. Whether at home or
abroad, we will respond to terrorism through defensive readiness of our facilities and

personnel, and the ability of our terrorism consequence management efforts to mitigate
injury and damage.

Our strategy requires us to both prevent and, if necessary, respond to terrorism.
Prevention -- which includes intelligence collection, breaking up cells, and limiting the
movement, planning, and organization of terrorists -- entails more unknowns and its
effectiveness will never be fully proven or appreciated, but it is certainly the preferable
path. For example, as a result of the quiet cooperation with some of our allies and among
federal authorities, agencies, and local law enforcement, planned terrorist attacks within
the United States and against U.S. interests abroad during the millennium celebration
were thwarted. A major aspect of our prevention efforts is bolstering the political will and
security capabilities of those states that are on the front lines to terrorist threats and that
are disproportionately impacted by the expanding threat. This coalition of nations is
imperative to the international effort to contain and ﬁght the terrorism that threatens
American interests.

Avenues of international trade provide a highway for the tools and weapons of
international terrorists. The same sophisticated transportation network that can efﬁciently,
safely, and reliably move people and goods is also equally attractive to those whose
motives may be hostile, dangerous, or criminal. Systems that promote efﬁciency, volume
and speed, fueling economic prosperity, create new challenges in the balance between
policing and facilitating the transnational movements of people and goods. Globalization
and electronic commerce transcend conventional borders, fast rendering traditional
border security measures at air, land, and sea ports of entry ineffective or obsolete.
Despite the challenges, we are developing tools to close off this avenue for terrorists. In
this new environment, prudent, reasonable, and affordable security measures will require
an approach transcending any particular transportation node or sector. The International
Trade Data System (ITDS), already in initial implementation pilot testing, was created to
foster an integrated system to electronically collect, use, and disseminate international
trade and transportation data. By transcending transportation nodes and sectors, efforts
like the ITDS project will foreclose opportunities terrorists may believe are emerging with
globalization.

When terrorism occurs, despite our best efforts, we can neither forget the crime nor ever
give up on bringing its perpetrators to justice. We make no concessions to terrorists.
Since 1993, a dozen terrorist fugitives have been apprehended overseas and rendered,
formally or informally, to the United States to answer for their crimes. These include the
perpetrators of the World Trade Center bombing, the attack outside CIA headquarters,
and an attack on a Pan Am flight more than 18 years ago. In 1998, the U.S. Armed
Forces carried out strikes against a chemical weapons target and an active terrorist base
operated by Usama bin Ladin, whose terror network had carried out bombings of
American embassies in Nairobi and Dar es Salaam and planned still other attacks
against Americans. We will likewise pursue the criminals responsible for the attack on the
USS Cole in Yemen.

Whenever possible, we use law enforcement, diplomatic, and economic tools to wage the
fight against terrorism. But there have been, and will be, times when those tools are not
enough. As long as terrorists continue to target American citizens, we reserve the right to
act in self-defense by striking at their bases and those who sponsor, assist, or actively
support them, as we have done over the years in different countries.

Fighting terrorism requires a substantial commitment of financial, human, and political
resources. Since 1993, both the FBI's counterterrorism budget and the number of FBI
agents assigned to counterterrorism have more than doubled. The President has also
created and filled the post of National Coordinator for Security, Infrastructure Protection,

and Counterterrorism. Three presidential directives now coordinate the efforts of senior
counterterrorism personnel from various government agencies in dealing with WMD and
otherthreats at home. The FBI and the State Department, respectively, operate Rapid
Deployment Teams and interagency Foreign Emergency Support Teams to deploy
quickly to scenes of terrorist incidents worldwide.

However, it is not only the response capabilities that need significant resources. It is our
preventive efforts, such as active diplomatic and military engagement, political pressure,
economic sanctions, and bolstering allies‘ political and security capabilities, that also
require strong ﬁnancial support in order to squeeze terrorists before they act. Providing
political support and economic assistance to front line states and other allies impacted by
this threat expands the circle of nations ﬁghting against threats to the United States.
These preventive measures are an important partner to our counterterrorism response
efforts.

We must continue to devote the necessary resources for America's strategy to combat
terrorism, which integrates preventive and responsive measures and encompasses a
graduated scale of enhanced law enforcement and intelligence gathering, vigorous
diplomacy, and, where needed, military action.

Domestic Preparedness Against Weapons of Mass Destruction

Defending the United States against weapons of mass destruction is a top national
security priority. In October 1998, the President signed into law legislation criminalizing
the unjustified accumulation of dangerous chemicals, thereby enhancing the ability of law
enforcement to prevent potentially catastrophic terrorist acts by allowing enforcement
action before the chemicals are weaponized. Additionally, concerted efforts have been
undertaken to mitigate the consequences of a WMD attack.

The Federal Government, in coordination with state and local authorities, will respond
rapidly and decisively to any terrorist incident in the United States involving WMD.
Increased preparedness at home is critical to defending against, and responding to, such
unconventional threats. The Administration developed a Five-Year lnteragency
Counterterrorism and Technology Crime Plan to address these issues.

Established in 1998, a standing Weapons of Mass Destruction Preparedness lnteragency
Working Group, chaired by the National Coordinator, addresses current and future
requirements of local, state, and federal authorities that are directly responsible for the
WMD crisis and consequence management efforts. In coordinating the interagency
process and cooperation between these three levels of government, several initiatives
are now in place to better prepare the United States against a WMD incident. These
initiatives include equipping and training first responders in the 157 largest metropolitan
areas across the nation to prepare for, and defend against, chemical, biological, or
nuclear weapons of mass destruction attacks; renovating the public health surveillance
system; and establishing civilian medical stockpiles of vaccines and antibiotics.

Critical Infrastructure Protection

An extraordinarily sophisticated information technology (IT) infrastructure fuels America's
economy and national security. Critical infrastructures, including telecommunications,
energy, ﬁnance, transportation, water, and emergency services, form a bedrock upon
which the success of all our endeavors -- economic, social, and military -- depend. These
infrastructures are highly interconnected, both physically and by the manner in which they
rely upon information technology and the national information infrastructure. This trend

toward increasing interdependence has accelerated in recent years with the advent of the
Information Age.

At the same time that the IT revolution has led to substantially more interconnected
infrastructures with generally greater centralized control, the advent of "just in time"
business practices has reduced margins for error for infrastructure owners and operators.
In addition, the trend toward deregulation and growth of competition in key infrastructures
has understandably eroded the willingness of owners and operators to pay for spare
capacity that traditionally served a useful "shock absorber‘ role in cushioning key
infrastructures from failures. Finally, the increase in the number of mergers among
infrastructure providers has increased the pressure for further reductions in spare
capacity as managers seek to reduce overhead and wring "excess" costs out of merged
companies.

As with the 1993 World Trade Center bombing, ongoing hostile hacker attacks, and cyber
conflicts between China and Taiwan have shown, asymmetric warfare against the United
States will likely grow. We must understand the vulnerabilities and interdependencies of
our infrastructures, accept that such attacks know no international boundaries, and work
to mitigate potential problems.

In January 2000, the President launched the National Plan for Information Systems
Protection and announced new budget proposals for critical infrastructure protection.
Specific new proposals included the Federal Cyber Systems Training and Education
program to offer IT education in exchange for federal service; an intrusion detection
network for the Department of Defense and for federal civilian agencies; and the Institute
for Information Infrastructure Protection, an innovative public/private partnership to fill key
gaps in critical infrastructure protection R&D. The Institute represented part of a 32%
increase that were proposed for computer security research and development efforts for
the FY 2001 budget.

Implementing the proposals of the National Plan, as well as other future projects, will
contribute to our economic competitiveness, military strength, and general public health
and safety. These proposals will also protect the ability of state and local governments to
maintain order and deliver minimum essential public services while also working with the
private sector to ensure the orderly functioning of the economy and the delivery of vital
services.

The National Infrastructure Protection Center (NIPC), founded in 1998 under Presidential
Decision Directive 63, is the national focal point for warning, analysis, and response
regarding threats to the infrastructures. Over the past two years it has provided warnings
to the private sector, federal, state, and local governments regarding infrastructure
threats. It has also coordinated numerous investigations of destructive computer viruses,
computer intrusions against United States Government and private IT systems, and
denial of service attacks both in the United States and overseas.

Some aspects of our critical infrastructure, such as the various transportation systems,
are not commonly associated with the trends of globalization and technological change,
but nonetheless are being dramatically affected by them. For example, the Marine
Transportation System, which consists of waterways, ports, and their intermodal
connections, vessels, vehicles and system users, provides American businesses with
critical competitive access to suppliers and markets that will be key to maintaining our
nation's role as a global power. Threats to this and other transportation systems will drive
new security imperatives that we must continue to balance with the need for speed and
efficiency. In any case, ensuring the long-term health of these traditional aspects of our

critical infrastructure must remain a priority even as we look to new technologies to
improve other aspects of our infrastructures and provide other competitive advantages.

Most importantly, the Federal Government cannot protect critical infrastructures alone.
The private sector owns and operates the vast majority of these infrastructures.
Protecting critical infrastructure, therefore, requires the Federal Government to build
partnerships with the private sector in all areas -- from business and higher education, to
law enforcement, to R&D. The Secretary of Commerce and industry leaders -- mostly
from Fortune 500 companies -- are leading the Partnership for Critical Infrastructure
Security. The Attorney General has teamed up with the Information Technology
Association of America to promote industry-government cooperation against cyber crime
through the Cyber Citizen project. The NIPC, meanwhile, is establishing cooperative
relationships between industry and law enforcement through its |nfraGard initiative.

Some segments of our critical infrastructures have not historically devoted signiﬁcant
resources to protection from threats other than those caused by natural means. As a
result, we are building a strong foundation for continued protection of our critical
infrastructures. The public and private sectors must work together to conduct R&D in
infrastructure protection and interdependencies, increase investment in training and
educating cyber-security practitioners (to include building an adequate base of
researchers in this new discipline), and ﬁnd innovative technical, policy, and legal
solutions that protect our infrastructures and preserve our civil rights.

National Security Emergency Preparedness

U.S. Continuity of Government and Continuity of Operations programs remain a top
national security priority into the 21 st century. They preserve the capability to govern,
lead, and perform essential functions and services to meet essential defense and civilian
needs. Together with other security, critical infrastructure protection, and counterterrorism
programs, Continuity of Government and Continuity of Operations programs remain an
important hedge against current and emerging threats, and future uncertainties.

We will do all we can to deter and prevent destructive and threatening forces such as
terrorism, NBC weapons use, disruption ofour critical infrastructures, and regional or
state-centered threats from endangering our citizens. But if an emergency occurs, we
must be prepared to respond effectively at home and abroad to protect lives and
property, mobilize the personnel, resources, and capabilities necessary to effectively
handle the emergency, and ensure the survival of our institutions and infrastructures. To
this end, comprehensive, all-hazard emergency planning by Federal departments,
agencies and the military, as well as a strong and responsive industrial and technology
base, will be maintained as crucial national security emergency preparedness
requirements.

Fighting Drug Trafficking and Other International Crime

Broad ranges of criminal activities that originate overseas threaten the safety and well
being of the American people.

Drug Trafficking. Drug use and its damaging consequences cost our society over $110
billion per year and poison the schools and neighborhoods where our youth learn and
play. Aggressive law enforcement is dramatically weakening the domestic perpetrators of
organized crime who have controlled America's drug trade for much of the past century.
Today, international drug syndicates based abroad challenge us. The criminals who run
the international drug trade continue to diversify and seek new markets in the United

States -- moving beyond large cities into smaller communities and even rural towns. All
Americans, regardless of economic, geographic, or other position in society, feel the
effects of drug use.

The National Drug Control Strategy, both at home and abroad, integrates prevention and
treatment with law enforcement and interdiction efforts. We aim to cut illegal drug use
and availability in the United States by 50% by 2007, and reduce the health and social
consequences of drug use and trafficking by 25% over the same period.

Domestically, we have engaged in a wide range of treatment and prevention efforts. We
seek to educate and enable our youth to reject illegal drugs, increase the safety of U.S.
citizens by substantially reducing drug-related crime and violence; reduce health and
social costs to the public of illegal drug use; reduce domestic cultivation of cannabis and
production of methamphetamines and other synthetic drugs; and shield America's air,
land, and sea frontiers from the drug threat.

The Drug-Free Community Support program and the Drug-Free Schools and
Communities program promote citizen participation in anti-drug efforts and help to
provide drug-free learning environments for our children. The Office of National Drug
Control Policy is leading the implementation of a $2 billion, multi-year, science-based,
national media campaign on the consequences of youth drug use. In the law enforcement
arena, we have assisted communities in their law enforcement efforts; are committed to
stemming the flow of drugs into our country; and have enhanced coordination among
Federal, state, and local law enforcement agencies to arrest and prosecute drug
traffickers and abusers. Concerted efforts by the public, all levels of government, and the
private sector, together with other governments, private groups, and international
organizations will be required for our strategy to succeed.

Internationally, our strategy recognizes that the most effective counterdrug operations are
mounted at the source where illegal drugs are grown and produced. Our efforts therefore
center on supply reduction in major drug exporting countries. In these "source nations,"
we act to bolster the capabilities of governments to help them reduce cultivation by
eradicating drug crops, develop alternative crops, destroy drug labs, and control
chemicals used in illegal drug production. As a second line of defense, in the transit zone
between source regions and the U.S. border, we detect, monitor, and communicate with
partner nations on the movement of suspicious surface, sea, and air traffic outside the
United States. We support interdiction programs to halt the shipment of illicit drugs. In
concert with allies abroad, we pursue prosecution of major drug trafﬁckers, dismantling
drug trafficking organizations, prevention of money laundering, and elimination of criminal
financial support networks.

In an example of such cooperative effort, the United States is providing $1.3 billion in
support for Plan Colombia, President Andres Pastrana's effort to ﬁght Colombian drug
trafficking and strengthen democracy, as well as promote legitimate economic endeavors
in Colombia. Since Colombian drug traffickers supply approximately 90% of the cocaine
used in the United States, U.S. assistance to Plan Colombia's interdiction, eradication,
and alternative crop development efforts will be necessary if we are to stem this deadly
drug's flow into the United States. As an additional measure, we continue to strongly
support interdiction programs to halt the flow of drugs across the U.S. border either by
independent means or exploiting the U.S. transportation system.

Other International Crime. Economic globalization increasingly makes all nations and

peoples vulnerable to various unlawful activities that impede rational business decisions
and fair competition in a market economy. Such activities include, but are not limited to,
extortion, corruption, migrant smuggling, trafficking in persons, money laundering,

counterfeiting, credit card and other ﬁnancial fraud, and intellectual property theft. Many
of these activities tend to impede or disrupt the safe and secure international movement
of passengers and goods across international lines. They also attack the integrity and
reliability of international financial systems. Corruption and extortion activities by
organized crime groups can even undermine the integrity of government and imperil
fragile democracies. And, the failure of governments to effectively control international
crime rings within their borders or their willingness to harbor international criminals
endangers global stability. There must be no safe haven where criminals can roam free,
beyond the reach of our extradition and legal assistance treaties.

Open markets must be preserved, laws and regulations governing financial institutions
must be standardized, and international law enforcement cooperation in the financial
sector must be improved for the benefits of economic globalization to be preserved.

The United States is implementing a number of initiatives and strategies tailored to
combat various forms of international crime. For example, we launched the National
Money Laundering Strategy, under which the Departments of Treasury and Justice work
to disrupt illegal profit flows to organized crime groups. The Presidential Decision
Directive on International Organized Crime directs close coordination among Federal
agencies to identify, target, and disrupt the activities of criminal groups, and the
President's International Crime Control Strategy establishes the broad goals and
implementing objectives for this effort. Finally, in December 2000, the United States
published its ﬁrst-ever comprehensive International Crime Threat Assessment detailing
criminal activities around the globe that impact our national security.

The United States is pursuing efforts to combat international crimes that are economic in
origin, but the effects of which transcend economics. They include crimes that result in
the contamination of the environment, such as the illegal international movement of
chloro-fluorocarbons (CFCs) that attack the ozone layer, thereby endangering all life on
earth. They also include crimes that threaten the world's diversity through illegal
trafficking in endangered and threatened species of ﬂora and fauna. The United States
continues to work with nations around the world to counter these crimes.

Smaller-Scale Contingencies

Smaller-scale contingency (SSC) operations encompass the full range of military
operations short of major theater warfare, including peacekeeping operations, enforcing
embargoes and no-fly zones, evacuating U.S. citizens, reinforcing key allies, neutralizing
NBC weapons facilities, supporting counterdrug operations, protecting freedom of
navigation in international waters, providing disaster reliefand humanitarian assistance,
coping with mass migration, and engaging in information operations. These challenging
operations are likely to arise frequently and require significant commitments of human
and ﬁscal resources overtime. These operations also put a premium on the ability of the
U.S. military to work closely and effectively with other United States Government
agencies, non-governmental organizations, regional and international security
organizations and coalition partners.

In general, SSC operations are aimed at checking aggression and addressing local and

regional crises before they escalate or spread. Thus, while SSCs may involve other than
"vita|" national security interests, resolving SSCs gives us the chance to prevent greater
and costlier conflicts that might well threaten U.S. vital interests.

The United States need not take on sole responsibility for operations and expenditures in
SSCs. In fact, we have encouraged and supported friends and allies‘ assumption of both

participatory and leadership roles in regional conflicts. Such encouragement, in theory,
constitutes a fruitful middle ground between inaction and conflict. In practice, the United
States has recently played a role in a number of successful coalition operations. These
include participating in NATO-led Bosnia and Kosovo operations with predominantly
European troop participation; providing logistical, intelligence, and other support to
operations in East Timor; and supporting the United Nations‘ and Economic Community
of West African States‘ leadership roles in seeking peace for Sierra Leone.

Coalition efforts in SSCs raise the critical question of command and control. Under no
circumstances will the President ever relinquish his constitutional command authority
over U.S. forces. However, there may be times in the future, just as in the past, when it is
in our interest to place U.S. forces under the temporary operational control of a
competent allied or United Nations commander.

There is an important role for the United Nations as a tool in managing conflict. UN
peacekeeping operations can be a very effective alternative to direct intervention by the
United States. The Brahimi report on peacekeeping reform offers many good
recommendations that, if implemented, can make this tool even more effective as an
instrument of policy.

As in regional conflict, conducting smaller-scale contingencies means confronting new
threats such as terrorism, information attack, computer network operations, and the use
or threat of use of weapons of mass destruction. United States forces must also remain
prepared to withdraw from contingency operations if they are needed in the event of a
major theater war. Accordingly, we must continue to train, equip, and organize U.S.
forces to be capable of performing multiple missions at any given time.

Maior Theater Warfare

Fighting and winning major theater wars is the ultimate test of our Armed Forces -- a test
at which they must always succeed. For the foreseeable future, the United States,
preferably in concert with allies, must have the capability to deter and, if deterrence fails,
defeat large-scale, cross-border aggression in two distant theaters in overlapping time
frames. Maintaining a two major theater war capability reassures our friends and allies
and makes coalition relationships with the United States more attractive. It deters
opportunism elsewhere when we are heavily involved in deterring or defeating
aggression in one theater, or while conducting multiple smaller-scale contingencies and
engagement activities in other theaters. It also provides a hedge against the possibility
that we might encounter threats larger or more difficult than expected. A strategy for
deterring and defeating aggression in two theaters ensures that we maintain the
capability and ﬁexibility to meet unknown future threats, while continued global
engagement helps preclude such threats from developing.

Fighting and winning major theater wars entails three challenging requirements. First, we
must maintain the ability to rapidly defeat initial enemy advances short of the enemy's
objectives in two theaters, in close succession. We must maintain this ability to ensure
that we can seize the initiative, minimize territory lost before an invasion is halted, and
ensure the integrity of our warfighting coalitions. Failure to defeat initial enemy advances
rapidly would make the subsequent campaign to evict enemy forces from captured
territory more difﬁcult, lengthy and costly, and could undermine U.S. credibility and
increase the risk of conflict elsewhere.

Second, the United States must be prepared to ﬁght and win under conditions where an
adversary may use asymmetric means against us -- unconventional approaches that

avoid or undermine our strengths while exploiting our vulnerabilities. Because of our
conventional military dominance, adversaries are likely to use asymmetric means, such
as NBC weapons, information operations, attacks on our critical infrastructure, or
terrorism. Such asymmetric attacks could be used to disrupt the critical logistics pipeline -
- from its origins in the United States, along sea and air routes, at in-transit refueling and
staging bases, to its termination at airfields, seaports, and supply depots in theater -- as
well as our forces deployed in the ﬁeld. The threat of NBC attacks against U.S. forces in
theater or U.S. territory could be used in an attempt to deter U.S. military action in
defense of its allies and other security interests.

We are enhancing the preparedness of our Armed Forces to effectively conduct
sustained operations despite the presence, threat, or use of NBC weapons. These efforts
include development, procurement, and deployment of theater missile defense systems
to protect fonNard-deployed military personnel, as well as enhanced passive defenses
against chemical and biological weapons, improved intelligence collection and
counterforce capabilities, heightened security awareness and force protection measures
worldwide. We are also enhancing our ability to defend against hostile information
operations, which could, in the future, take the form of a full-scale, strategic information
attack against our critical national infrastructures, government, and economy -- as well as
attacks directed against our military forces.

Third, our military must also be able to transition to fighting major theater wars from a
posture of global engagement -- from substantial levels of peacetime engagement
overseas as well as multiple concurrent smaller-scale contingency operations.
V\ﬁthdrawing from such operations would pose signiﬁcant political and operational
challenges. Options available to the National Command Authorities (NCA) may include
backfilling those forces withdrawn from contingency operations or substituting for forces
committed to such operations. Ultimately, however, the United States must accept a
degree of risk associated with withdrawing from contingency operations and engagement
activities in order to reduce the greater risk incurred if we failed to respond adequately to
major theater wars.

The Decision to Emplov Military Forces

The decision whether to use force is dictated ﬁrst and foremost by our national interests.
In those specific areas where our vital interests are at stake, our use of force will be
decisive and, if necessary, unilateral.

In situations posing a threat to important national interests, military forces should only
be used if they are likely to accomplish their objectives, the costs and risks of their
employment are commensurate with the interests at stake, and other non-military means
are incapable of achieving our objectives. Such uses of military forces should be
selective and limited, reﬁecting the importance of the interests at stake. We act in concert
with the international community whenever possible, but do not hesitate to act unilaterally
when necessary.

The decision to employ military forces to support our humanitarian and other interests
focuses on the unique capabilities and resources the military can bring to bear, rather
than on its combat power. Generally, the military is not the best tool for humanitarian
concerns, but under certain conditions use of our Armed Forces may be appropriate.
Those conditions exist when the scale of a humanitarian catastrophe dwarfs the ability of
civilian relief agencies to respond, when the need for relief is urgent and only the military
has the ability to provide an immediate response, when the military is needed to establish
the preconditions necessary for effective application of other instruments of national

power, when a humanitarian crisis could affect U.S. combat operations, or when a
response otherwise requires unique military resources. Such efforts by the United States,
preferably in conjunction with other members of the international community, will be
limited in duration, have a clearly defined mission and end state, entail minimal risk to
U.S. lives, and be designed to give the affected country the opportunity to restore its own
basic services.

In all cases, the costs and risks of U.S. military involvement must be commensurate with
the interests at stake. We will be more inclined to act where there is reason to believe
that our action will bring lasting improvement. Our involvement will be more
circumscribed when regional states or organizations are better positioned to act than we
are. Even in these cases, however, the United States will be actively engaged with
appropriate diplomatic, economic, and military tools.

In every case, we will consider several critical questions before committing military force:
have we explored or exhausted non-military means that offer a reasonable chance of
achieving our goals? is there a clearly defined, achievable mission? What is the threat
environment and what risks will our forces face? What level of effort will be needed to
achieve our goals? What is the potential cos -- human and ﬁnancial -- of the operation?
What is the opportunity cost in terms of maintaining our capability to respond to higher-
priority contingencies? Do we have milestones and a desired end state to guide a
decision on terminating the mission? is there an interagency or multinational political-
military plan to ensure that hard-won achievements are sustained and continued in the
mission area after the withdrawal of U.S. forces?

Having decided that use of military forces is appropriate, the decision on how they will be
employed is based on two guidelines. First, our forces will have a clear mission and the
means to achieve their objectives decisively. Second, as much as possible, we will seek
the support and participation ofour allies, friends, and relevant international institutions.
When our vital interests are at stake, we are prepared to act alone. But in most situations,
working with other nations increases the effectiveness of each nation's actions and
lessens everyone's burden.

Sustaining our engagement abroad over the long term will require the support of the
American people and the Congress to bear the costs of defending U.S. interests --
including the risk of losing U.S. lives. Some decisions to engage abroad with our military
forces could well face popular opposition, but must ultimately be judged by whether they
advance the interests of our nation in the long run. When we judge it to be in our interest
to intervene, we must remain clear in our purposes and resolute in our actions. We must
also ensure that protection of that force is a critical priority and that our protection efforts
visibly dissuade potential adversaries.

Preparing for an Uncertain Future

We must prepare for an uncertain future, even as we address today's security problems.
We need to look closely at our national security apparatus to ensure its effectiveness by
adapting its institutions to meet new challenges. This means we must transform our
capabilities and organizations -- diplomatic, defense, intelligence, law enforcement, and
economic -- to act swiftly and to anticipate new opportunities and threats in today's
continually evolving, highly complex international security environment. We must also
have a strong, competitive, technologically superior, innovative, and responsive industrial
and research and development base and a national transportation system with the
resources and capacity to support disaster response and recovery efforts if national
mobilization is required.

Strategically, our transformation within the military requires integrating activities in six
areas: service concept development and experimentation; joint concept development and
experimentation; robust processes to implement changes in the Services and joint
community; focused science and technology efforts; international transformation
activities; and new approaches to personnel development that foster a culture of bold
innovation and dynamic leadership.

The mi|itary's transformation requires striking a balance among three critical funding
priorities: maintaining the ability of our forces to shape and respond today; modernizing to
protect the long-term readiness of the force; and exploiting the revolution in military
affairs to ensure we maintain our unparalleled capabilities to shape and respond
effectively in the future. Transformation also means taking prudent steps to position us to
effectively counter unlikely but significant future threats -- particularly asymmetric threats.

Investment in research and development is an essential element of our transformation
effort. It permits us to do what we do best: innovate, not copy. Revolutionary, not
evolutionary, leaps will happen in an economy where new ideas can be pursued and
quickly translated from vision to reality. It is a competitive advantage that leverages our
technological breakthroughs into sustained military superiority. This requires support not
only for bringing promising technologies out of the labs for insertion in weapons
platforms, but also for fundamental research that will produce the as-yet-unknown
technologies that will give the United States the revolutionary advantages we will need in
the future. Ultimately, our development efforts must be practical and founded in war-
fighting objectives tested through aggressive experimentation.

At the same time we push technological frontiers and transform our military, we also must
address future interoperability with multinational partners. Since they will have varying
levels of technology, a tailored approach to interoperability that accommodates a wide
range of needs and capabilities is necessary. We must encourage our more technically
advanced friends and allies to build the capabilities that are particularly important for
interoperability, including the command, control, and communication capabilities that form
the backbone of combined operations. We must help them bridge technological gaps,
supporting international defense cooperation and multinational ventures where they
enhance our mutual support and interoperability.

In May 2000, the United States spearheaded a Defense Trade Security Initiative (DTSI);
a package of 17 measures designed to enhance allied interoperability and coalition
warfighting capabilities by facilitating the transfer of critical U.S.-origin defense items to
our allies. At the same time, DTSI promotes a strong and robust allied transnational
defense industrial base that can provide innovative and affordable products needed to
meet allied warﬁghting requirements for the 21 st century.

Transformation extends well beyond the acquisition of new military systems -- we seek to
leverage advanced technological, doctrinal, operational and organizational innovations
both within government and in the commercial sector to give U.S. forces greater
capabilities and flexibility. Joint Forces Command and the Armed Services are pursuing
an aggressive, wide-ranging innovation and experimentation program to achieve that
transformation. The Service programs focus on their core competencies and are
organized to explore capability improvements in the near-, mid-, and far-term. The Joint
Forces Command program ensures a strong joint perspective while also complementing
efforts by the Services. A multilateral program has also been developed. NATO's
Defense Capabilities Initiative now includes both a NATO-centered and nation-centered
concept development and experimentation program, which Joint Forces Command
complements with a joint experimentation program to include allies, coalition partners and
friends. A recently inaugurated interagency process on Contingency Planning offers the

promise of improving the coordination among government agencies well before a crisis is
at hand.

The on-going integration of the Active and Reserve components into a Total Force is
another important element of the transformation. Despite the rapid pace of technological
innovation, the human dimension of warfare remains timeless. In this era of multinational
operations and complex threats involving ethnic, religious, and cultural strife, regional
expertise, language proficiency, and cross-cultural communications skills have never
been more important to the U.S. military. We will continue to transform and modernize
our forces by recruiting, training, and retaining quality people at all levels of the military
and among its civilian personnel who bring broad skills, an innovative spirit, and good
judgement to lead dynamic change into the 21st century.

To support the readiness, modernization and transformation of our military forces, we will
work with the Congress to enact legislation to implement the Defense Reform Initiative,
which will free up resources through a revolution in business affairs. This effort includes
competitive sourcing, acquisition reform, transformation of logistics, and elimination of
excess infrastructure through two additional rounds of base realignment and closure. The
Administration, in partnership with the Congress, will continue to ensure that we maintain
the best-trained, best-equipped and best-led military force in the world for the 21 st
century.

In the area of law enforcement, the United States is already facing criminal threats that
are much broader in scope and much more sophisticated than those we have confronted
in the past. We must prepare for the law enforcement challenges arising from emerging
technology, globalization of trade and ﬁnance, and other international dynamics. Our
strategy for the future calls for the development of new investigative tools and
approaches as well as increased integration of effort among law enforcement agencies at
all levels of government, both in the United States and abroad.

We will continue efforts to construct appropriate 21st century national security programs
and structures government-wide. We will continue to foster innovative approaches and
organizational structures to better protect American lives, property and interests at home
and abroad.

Promoting Prosperity

Globalization, which has drawn our economic and security interests closely together, is
an inexorable trend in the post-Cold War international system. It is logical, then, for the
United States to capture its positive energy and to limit its negative outcomes, where they
exist. In doing both we will be able to promote shared prosperity, the second core
objective of our national security strategy.

Strengthening Financial Coordination

As a result of economic globalization, prosperity for the United States and others is
inextricably linked to foreign economic developments. Interdependence of this degree
makes it incumbent upon the United States to be a cooperative leader and partner in the
global financial system. This means doing our part to provide economic and political
support to international financial institutions; working to reform them; equipping them with
the tools necessary to react to future financial crises; and expanding them to embrace
sustainable development efforts in emerging market economies.

Our objective is to build a stable, resilient global ﬁnancial system that promotes strong
global economic growth while providing broad benefits in all countries. Throughout the
past seven years, Congress and the President have worked together to enhance funding
for international economic institutions and programs. Promoting our prosperity requires
us to sustain these commitments in the years and decades ahead.

Drawing on the lessons of the Mexican peso crisis in 1994 and the Asian crises in 1997
and 1998, the United States took the lead in advocating steps to strengthen the
architecture of the international ﬁnancial system so that it more effectively promotes
stronger policies in emerging market economies, works to prevent crises, and is better
equipped to handle crises when they do occur. As part of a proactive effort to retool the
system, the United States proposed creation of the Contingent Credit Line in the IMF to
encourage countries to avoid crises. In addition to providing external incentives, it assists
these countries to also improve their own debt management. The United States has also
taken the initiative in 1999 and 2000, once financial stability was restored, to advocate a
series of reforms in the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank. These
include restructuring lending instruments, introducing greater transparency and
accountability into their operations, increasing efforts to reduce vulnerability in advance of
crisis, and involving private sector creditors in crisis resolution.

Some developing countries face particularly difﬁcult challenges in their efforts to achieve
sustainable development. The HIPC Initiative, as both an international assistance and
development tool, provides multilateral debt reduction to countries facing unmanageable
debt burdens. In addition to providing $1 billion in support to the HIPC, the United States
has led the IMF, World Bank, and otherfinancial institutions to focus attention and
resources on the health, education, environment, and poverty issues that surround
sustainable development.

Promoting an Open Trading System

In a world where over 96% of the world's consumers live outside the United States, the
Nation's domestic economic growth is predicated on our success in expanding trade with
other nations.

Since 1993, the President has negotiated over 300 distinct trade agreements. Prominent
among these have been the following, which have resulted in declining unemployment,
rising standards of living, and robust economic growth in the United States:

- The North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), which institutionalized
our trading relationship with Mexico and Canada. NAFTA created the world's
largest free trade zone, expanded trade among its three signatories by over 85%,
and generated increased U.S. exports to both Mexico and Canada. Mexico and
Canada now take nearly 40% of U.S. exports.

- The Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, which
created the V\lTO and created, or substantially expanded, multilateral trade rules
and commitments to cover agriculture, services, and intellectual property rights.
The VVTO has been instrumental in assisting transition economies to progress
from centrally planned to market economies and promoting growth and
development in poor countries. The United States continuously leads accession
negotiations with countries who are seeking V\lTO membership and who are
willing to meet its high standards of market access and rules-based trading.

- Permanent Normal Trade Relations with China, which will provide American
farmers, businesses, and industries with market access to the world's most
populous nation.

We have consistently advocated trade liberalization with our values in mind, ensuring that
increased trade advances, rather than weakens, the rights of workers and the health of
the environment.

NAFTA was historic because it mandated environmental and labor protections; it was the
first trade agreement to explicitly create the link between trade liberalization and the
protection of labor rights and the environment. History was again made this year when
the United States entered into a Free Trade Agreement with the Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan. Language in the agreement ensures that liberalization of trade between both
nations, the protection of labor rights, and safeguarding the environment are mutually
supportive.

The United States ensured that the V\lTO preamble established environmental protection
as an overall objective of the parties to the agreement. In November of 1999, the
President issued an executive order on Environmental Reviews of Trade Agreements, an
order requiring careful environmental analysis of major new trade agreements. The Office
of the United States Trade Representative and the Council on Environmental Quality
oversee the implementation of the order, ensuring that promoting trade and protecting the
environment go hand-in-hand.

Numerous regional economic partnerships also facilitate global trade. In addition to
NAFTA, the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation Forum (APEC), the President's trade and
investment initiative in Africa, the Transatlantic Economic Partnership, and negotiations
to create the Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA) by 2005 promote open trade in
other economic trading regions critical to our national security. V\ﬁth the enactment of the
U.S.-Caribbean Basin Trade Partnership Act of 2000 and the Africa Growth and
Opportunity Act of 2000, the United States set out to deepen and widen its regional
economic relationships.

A Congressional grant of "fast track" authority to the President would enhance his ability
to break down foreign trade barriers in a timely manner. "Fast track" promotes American
prosperity, just as it expedites domestic job creation and economic growth.

Enhancing American Competitiveness

Gaining the full beneﬁt of more open markets requires an integrated strategy that
maintains our technological advantages, promotes American exports abroad, and
ensures that export controls intended to protect our national security do not unnecessarily
make U.S. high technology companies less competitive globally.

Technological advantage

We will continue to support a vigorous science and technology base that promotes
economic growth, creates high-wage jobs, sustains a healthy, educated citizenry, and
provides the basis for our future military systems. We will continue to foster the open
interchange of people and ideas that underpins our scientific and technological
enterprise. We will invest in education and training to develop a workplace capable of
participating in our rapidly changing economy. And, we will invest in world-class
transportation, information, and space infrastructures for the 21st century.

Export Advocacy

The Administration created America's ﬁrst national export strategy, working with the
private sector to reform the way government and business cooperate to expand exports.
The Trade Promotion Coordination Committee has been instrumental in improving export
promotion efforts, coordinating our export ﬁnancing, implementing a government-wide
advocacy initiative, and updating market information systems and product standards
education.

This export strategy is working, and the United States has regained its position as the
world's largest exporter. While our strong export performance has supported millions of
new, export-related jobs, we must export more in the years ahead if we are to further
strengthen our trade balance position and raise living standards with high-wage jobs.

Enhanced Export Control

The United States is a world leader in high technology exports, including satellites,
cellular phones, computers, information security, and commercial aircraft. Some of this
technology has direct or indirect military applications, or may otherwise be used by states
or transnational organizations to threaten our national security. For that reason, the
United States Government carefully controls high technology exports by placing
appropriate restrictions on the sale of goods and technologies that could impair our
security. Imposing these controls recognizes that, in an increasingly competitive global
economy, where there are many non-U.S. suppliers, excessive restrictions will not limit
the availability of high technology goods. Rather, they serve only to make U.S. high
technology companies less competitive globally, thus losing market share and becoming
less able to produce cutting-edge products for the U.S. military and our allies.

Our current export control policy recognizes that we must balance a variety of factors. On
the one hand, our policies must promote and encourage the sale of our most competitive
goods abroad, while on the other, they must ensure that technologies that facilitate
proliferation of F do not end up in the wrong hands. Our policies therefore promote high
technology exports by making dual-use license decisions more transparent, predictable,
and timely through a rigorous licensing process administered by the Department of
Commerce at the same time that we ensure a thorough review of dual-use applications
by the Departments of Defense, State, and Energy. Any agency that disagrees with a
proposed export can enter the issue into a dispute resolution process that, if necessary,
may ultimately rise to the President for adjudication. As a result, reviews of dual-use
licenses are today more thorough than ever before. In the case of munitions exports, we
are committed to a policy of responsible restraint in the transfer of conventional arms and
technologies. A key goal in the years ahead is to strengthen worldwide controls in this
area, while facilitating exports of items that we wish to go to our allies and coalition
partners. The DTSI, which we look to enhance our future interoperability with our friends
and allies, is one such effort that will streamline U.S. munitions export control processes
while also devoting additional resources to increasing the security scrutiny applied to
munitions exports. The President's decision to seek agreements with close allies that
would permit extension of Canada-like exemptions to the ITAR for low risk exports will
signiﬁcantly enhance U.S. competitiveness while also enhancing export controls.

Encryption is an example of a specific technology that requires careful balance. Export
controls on encryption must be a part of an overall policy that balances several important
national interests, including promoting secure electronic commerce, protecting privacy
rights, supporting public safety and national security interests, and maintaining U.S.
industry leadership. After reviewing its encryption policy and consulting with industry,

privacy and civil liberties groups, the Administration implemented significant updates to
encryption export controls in January 2000 and concluded a second update in October
2000. The new policy continues a balanced approach by streamlining export controls
while protecting critical national security interests. U.S. companies now have new
opportunities to sell their software and hardware products containing encryption, without
limits on key length, to global businesses, commercial organizations and individuals.
Most U.S. mass-market software products, previously limited to 56 and 64 bit keys, are
approved for export to any end user.

In October 2000, the Administration finished another review of its policy to ensure that it
maintains balance while taking into account advances in technology and changes in
foreign and domestic markets. The most significant change is that the U.S. encryption
industry may now export encryption items and technology license-free to the European
Union and among several countries (including major trading partners outside of Western
Europe). The update is consistent with recent regulations adopted by the European
Union; thus assuring continued competitiveness of U.S. industry in international markets.
Other policy provisions implemented to facilitate technological development include
streamlined export provisions for beta test software, products that implement short-range
wireless encryption technologies, products that enable non-U.S.-sourced products to
operate together, and technology for standards development. Post-export reporting is
also streamlined to increase the relief to U.S. companies of these requirements.
Reporting will no longer be required for products exported by U.S.-owned subsidiaries
overseas, or for generally available software pre-loaded on computers or handheld
devices. These initiatives will assure the continuing competitiveness of U.S. companies in
international markets, consistent with the national interest in areas such as electronic
commerce, national security, and support to law enforcement.

Similarly, computer technology is an area where the application of export controls must
balance our national security concerns with efforts to promote and strengthen America's
competitiveness. It is likely we will continue to face extraordinarily rapid technological
changes that demand a regular review of export controls. Maintaining outdated controls
on commodity-level computers would hurt U.S. companies without beneﬁting our national
security. For these reasons, in February 2000, the Administration announced reforms to
computer export controls; the reforms permit sales of higher-level computer technology to
countries friendly to the United States. Export control agencies will also review advances
in computer technology on an ongoing basis and provide the President with
recommendations for updating computer export controls every six months.

U.S. efforts to stem proliferation cannot be effective without the cooperation of other
countries. We have strengthened cooperation through a host of international WMD
nonproliferation regimes, and we will continue to actively seek greater transparency in
conventional arms transfers. These efforts enlist the world community in the battle
against the proliferation of WMD, advanced conventional weapons and sensitive
technologies, while at the same time producing a level playing field for U.S. business by
ensuring that our competitors face corresponding export controls.

Providing for Energy Security

The United States depends on oil for about 40% of its primary energy needs, and roughly
half of our oil needs are met with imports. And although we import less than 15% of the
oil exported from the Persian Gulf, our allies in Europe and Asia account for about 80% of
those exports. For some years, the United States has been undergoing a fundamental
shift away from reliance on Middle East oil. Venezuela is consistently one of our top
foreign suppliers, and Africa now supplies 15% of our imported oil. Canada, Mexico, and

Venezuela combined supply almost twice as much oil to the United States as the Arab
OPEC countries. The Caspian Basin, with potential oil reserves of 160 billion barrels, also
promises to play an increasingly important role in meeting rising world energy demand in
coming decades.

Conservation measures and research leading to greater energy efficiency and alternative
fuels are a critical element of the U.S. strategy for energy security. Our research must
continue to focus on developing highly energy-efficient buildings, appliances, and
transportation and industrial systems, shifting them where possible to alternative or
renewable fuels, such as hydrogen, fuel cell technology, ethanol, or methanol from
biomass.

Conservation and energy research notwithstanding, the United States will continue to
have a vital interest in ensuring access to foreign oil sources. We must continue to be
mindful of the need for regional stability and security in key producing areas, as well as
our ability to use our naval power, if necessary, to ensure our access to, and the free flow
of, these resources.

Promoting Sustainable Development

True and lasting social and economic progress must occur in a sustainable fashion, that
meets the human and environmental needs for enduring growth. Common but reparable
impediments to sustainable development include:

- Lack of education, which shuts people out from participation in technological
advance.

- Disease and malnutrition, which stiﬁe productivity.

- Pollution, environmental degradation, and unsustained population growth, the
remediation of which is much more costly than pre-emptive action.

- Uncontrolled exploitation of natural resources (e.g., overhunting or overﬁshing
of species for food, overcutting of timber for firewood, overgrazing of grasslands
by cattle), which can be serious impediments to sustainable development.

- Unsustainable foreign debt obligations, which encourage currency devaluations
and capital ﬁight, and can absorb a substantial share of small economies‘
resources.

Efforts by the United States to foster sustainable development include:

- Promoting sound development policies that help build the economic and social
framework needed to encourage economic growth and poverty reduction and
facilitate the effective use of external assistance.

- Debt relief to free up developing countries‘ resources for meeting the basic
needs of their people. The United States led the G-7 in adopting the Cologne
Debt Initiative for reducing debts owed them by those of the world's poorest
countries committed to sound policies that promote economic growth and poverty
reduction. The resulting plan is embodied in the HIPC Initiative.

- Public health assistance consisting of grants, loans, and tax incentives for the
prevention and treatment of epidemics such as AIDS, malaria, and tuberculosis,
as well as the training of individuals to continue providing public health services.

- Human capacity development assistance for basic education and literacy
programs, job skills training, and other programs specifically designed to protect
women's health, provide educational opportunity, and promote women's
empowerment.

- Leadership in the G-8 and OECD to raise environmental standards for export
credit agencies and international financial institutions.

In consonance with our values, when a nation that embraces globalization gets left
behind, the United States and other proponents of globalization should reach out a hand.
Doing so in a manner that promotes notjust development, but sustainable development,
enhances regional stability, steadily expands the economic growth on which demand for
our exports depends, and honors our values, which encourage us to share our wealth
with others and inspire growth for more than just ourselves.

Promoting Democracy and Human Rights

The third goal of our national security strategy is to promote democracy, human rights,
and respect for the rule of law. Since the founding of the republic, our actions as a Nation
have always been guided by our belief that individuals should control their own destinies:
economically, politically, and spiritually. Our core values -- political and economic
freedom, respect for human rights, and the rule of law -- support this belief, guiding the
conduct of our government at home as well as in its dealings with others outside our
borders. Much as John V\ﬁnthrop set a standard for early colonists that we "be as a city
upon a hill," nearly four centuries later we still seek to demonstrate the power of our
democratic ideals and values by our example. This does not make us turn inward or
isolationist, nor should it be interpreted as a bid for hegemony. Rather, in keeping with
our values, we have lent our encouragement, support, and assistance to those nations
and peoples that freely desire to achieve the same benefits of liberty. The extraordinary
movement of nations away from repressive governance and toward democratic and
publicly accountable institutions over the last decade reflects how these ideals, when
allowed to be freely shared, can spread widely and rapidly, enhancing the security of all
nations. Despite some minor setbacks for a few of the newer democracies in the last
several years, the trend continues. Since the success of many of those changes is by no
means assured, our strategy must focus on strengthening the commitment and capacity
of nations to implement democratic reforms, protect human rights, fight corruption and
increase transparency in government. For this reason, we join with other nations in
creating the community of democracies. In June 2000, 106 countries meeting in Warsaw,
Poland endorsed the Warsaw Declaration laying out criteria for democracy and pledging
to help each other remain on the democratic path.

Emerging Democracies

The United States works to strengthen democratic and free market institutions and norms
in all countries, particularly those making the transition from closed to open societies.
This commitment to see freedom and respect for human rights take hold is not only just,
but pragmatic. Our security depends upon the protection and expansion of democracy
worldwide, without which repression, corruption and instability could engulf a number of
countries and threaten the stability of entire regions.

The sometimes difﬁcult road for new democracies in the 1990's demonstrates that free
elections are not enough. Genuine, lasting democracy also requires respect for human
rights, including the right to political dissent; freedom of religion and belief; an
independent media capable of engaging an informed citizenry; a robust civil society and
strong Non-governmental Organization (NGO) structures; the rule of law and an
independent judiciary; open and competitive economic structures; mechanisms to
safeguard minorities from oppressive rule by the majority; full respect for women's and
workers‘ rights; and civilian control of the military.

The United States is helping consolidate democratic and market reforms in Central and
Eastern Europe and the newly independent states of the former Soviet Union. Integrating
new democracies in Europe into European political, economic and security organizations,
such as NATO, OSCE, the EU, and the Council of Europe, will help lock in and preserve
the impressive progress these nations have made in instituting democratic and market-
economic reforms. Consolidating advances in democracy and free markets in our own
hemisphere remains a high priority. In the Asia Pacific region, economic dynamism is
increasingly associated with political modernization, democratic evolution, and the
widening of the rule of law. Indonesia's October 1999 election was a significant step
toward democracy and we will do our part to help Indonesia continue on that path. In
Africa, we are particularly attentive to states, such as South Africa and Nigeria, whose
entry into the community of market democracies may influence the future direction of an
entire region.

The methods for assisting emerging democracies are as varied as the nations involved.
Our public diplomacy programs are designed to share our democratic experience in both
government and civil society with the publics in emerging democracies. We must
continue leading efforts to mobilize international economic and political resources, as we
have with Russia, Ukraine, and other countries in Eastern Europe and Eurasia, and with
Southeast Europe. We must take firm action to help counter attempts to reverse
democracy, as has happened in Fiji, Haiti, Pakistan, Paraguay, and Peru.

We must help democratizing nations strengthen the pillars of civil society by supporting
administration ofjustice and rule of law programs; promoting the principle of civilian
control of the military; and training foreign police and security forces to solve crimes and
maintain order without violating the basic human rights of their citizens. And we must
seek to improve their market and educational institutions, fight corruption and political
discontent by encouraging good governance practices, and encourage a free and
independent local media that may promote these principles without fear of reprisal.

Adherence to Universal Human Rights and
Democratic Principles

We must sustain our efforts to press for adherence to democratic principles, and respect
for basic human rights and the rule of law worldwide, including in countries that continue
to defy democratic advances. Working bilaterally and through international institutions,
the United States promotes universal adherence to democratic principles and
international standards of human rights. Our efforts in the United Nations, the Community
of Democracies, and other organizations continue to make these principles the governing
standards for acceptable international behavior.

Ethnic conflict represents a great challenge to our values and our security. When it erupts
in ethnic cleansing or genocide, ethnic conflict becomes a grave violation of universal
human rights. We ﬁnd it clearly opposed to our national belief that innocent civilians

should never be subject to forcible relocation or slaughter because of their religious,
ethnic, racial, or tribal heritage. Ethnic conflict can also threaten regional stability and
may well give rise to potentially serious national security concerns. When this occurs, the
intersection of our values and national interests make it imperative that we take action to
prevent -- and whenever possible stop -- outbreaks of mass killing and displacement.

At other times the imperative for action will be much less clear. The United States and
other nations cannot respond to every humanitarian crisis in the world. But when the
world community has the power to stop genocide and ethnic cleansing, we will work with
our allies and partners, and with the United Nations, to mobilize against such violence --
as we did in Bosnia and Kosovo.

Our response will not be the same in every case. Sometimes concerted economic and
political pressure, combined with diplomacy, is the best answer. At other times, collective
military action is appropriate, feasible, and necessary. The way the international
community responds will depend upon the capacity of countries to act, and on their
perception of their national interests.

Events in the Bosnia conflict and preceding the 1994 genocide in Rwanda demonstrate
the pernicious power of inaccurate and malicious information in conflict-prone situations.
This made apparent our need to effectively use our information capabilities to counter
misinformation and incitement, prevent and mitigate ethnic conflict, promote independent
media organizations and the free flow of information, and support democratic
participation. As a result, in the spring of 1999, the President directed that all public
diplomacy and international information efforts be coordinated and integrated into our
foreign and national security policy-making process.

We will also continue to work -- bilaterally and with international institutions -- to ensure
that international human rights principles protect the most vulnerable or traditionally
oppressed groups in the world -- women, children, indigenous people, workers, refugees,
and other persecuted persons. To this end, we will seek to strengthen international
mechanisms that promote human rights and address violations of international
humanitarian law, such as the LIN Commission on Human Rights and the international
war crimes tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda. We strongly support wide
ratification of the ILO Convention on the Worst Forms of Child Labor. We also aim to
implement fully those international human rights treaties to which we are a party.

It is our aim to ensure protection for persons fleeing situations of armed conflict or
generalized human rights abuses by encouraging governments not to return refugees to
countries where they face persecution or torture. We also seek to focus additional
attention on the more vulnerable or traditionally oppressed people by spearheading new
international initiatives to combat the sexual exploitation of minors, child labor, use of
child soldiers, and homelessness among children.

Violence against, and trafficking in, women and children are international problems with
national implications. We have seen cases of trafficking in the United States for purposes
of forced prostitution, sweatshop labor, and domestic servitude. Our efforts have
expanded to combat this problem, both nationally and internationally, by increasing
awareness, focusing on prevention, providing victim assistance and protection, and
enhancing law enforcement. The President continues to call upon the Senate to give its
advice and consent to ratification to the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of
Discrimination Against Women, which will enhance our efforts to combat violence against
women, reform unfair inheritance and property rights, and strengthen women's access to
fair employment and economic opportunity.

Promotion of religious freedom is one of the highest concerns in our foreign policy.
Freedom of thought, conscience and religion is a bedrock issue for the American people.
To that end, the President signed the International Religious Freedom Act of 1998, which
provides the flexibility needed to advance religious freedom and to counter religious
persecution. In September 1999, we completed the ﬁrst phase outlined in the Act with
publication of the first annual report on the status of religious freedom worldwide, a 1,100
page document covering the status of religious freedom in 194 countries. In October, we
designated and sanctioned the Taliban regime in Afghanistan, Burma, China, Iran, Iraq,
Sudan, and the Milosevic regime in Serbia as "countries of particular concern" for having
engaged in or tolerated particularly severe violations of religious freedom. The United
States is active throughout the world assisting those who are persecuted because of their
religion and promoting freedom of religious belief and practice. We will continue to work
with individual nations and with international institutions to combat religious persecution
and promote religious freedom.

The United States will continue to speak out against human rights abuses and it will
continue to carry on human rights dialogues with countries willing to engage us
constructively. Because police and internal security services can be a source of human
rights violations, we use training and contacts between U.S. law enforcement and their
foreign counterparts to help address these problems. We do not provide training to police
or military units implicated in human rights abuses. When appropriate, we are prepared to
take strong measures against human rights violators. These include economic sanctions,
visa restrictions, and restricting sales of arms and police equipment that may be used to
commit human rights abuses. The Administration proposed legislation to prevent the
United States from becoming a safe haven for human rights violators. Both the
Immigration and Naturalization Service and the Federal Bureau of Investigation are
coordinating investigative efforts on cases involving allegations of human rights abuse to
pursue criminal prosecution or administrative removal proceedings in appropriate
instances.

In the 1990s, the United States took the lead in seeking compensation for Holocaust
survivors, many of whom are impoverished. Over a million individuals are eligible to apply
for beneﬁts under agreements concluded with Germany, Austria, and Switzerland. We
must now be certain that these agreements are carried out in a fair and equitable
manner, and that steps are taken to complete the work we have commenced in the areas
of Holocaust education, the payment of Holocaust era insurance policies, and the
restitution of art and other property.

Humanitarian Activities

Our efforts to promote democracy and human rights are complemented by our
humanitarian programs, which are designed to alleviate human suffering, address
resource and economic crises that could have global implications, and pursue
appropriate strategies for economic development.

We also must seek to promote reconciliation in states experiencing civil conflict and to
address migration and refugee crises. To this end, the United States will provide
appropriate financial support and work with other nations and international bodies, such
as the International Committee of the Red Cross and the UN High Commissionerfor
Refugees. We also will assist efforts to protect the rights of refugees and displaced
persons and to address the economic and social root causes of internal displacement
and international flight.

Private firms and NGOs that principally address human rights issues or democratic
principles often become natural allies in assisting in the relief of humanitarian crises. We
frequently find we have natural partners in labor unions, human rights groups,
environmental advocates, and chambers of commerce in providing international
humanitarian assistance. In providing this often life saving assistance, these private and
non-governmental groups visibly demonstrate another aspect of, and complement to, our
democratic values -- one of helping others in need. All of these values are thus seen by
the individuals and governments helped by these organizations, and they underscore
why our support of the humanitarian assistance efforts of private and non-governmental
groups is in keeping with our values and objective of promoting democracy and human
rights.

Supporting the global movement toward democracy requires a pragmatic, long-term effort
focused on both values and institutions. Our goal is a broadening of the community of
free-market democracies, and stronger institutions and international non-governmental
movements committed to human rights and democratization.

Ill. Integrated Regional Approaches

Our policies toward different regions reflect our overall strategy and guiding principles but
must be tailored to the unique challenges and opportunities of each region. Thus, each
uses a different application of the elements of engagement and does so in differing
degrees. Each region may have its own focused strategic objectives, but, in the end,
enhancing our own and the region's security while promoting prosperity, democracy, and
human rights are still the ultimate goals.

Europe and Eurasia

European stability is vital to our own security. The United States has three strategic goals
in Europe: integration of the region, a cooperative transatlantic relationship with Europe
on global issues, and fostering opportunities while minimizing proliferation risks posed by
collapse of the Soviet Union. The first goal, building a Europe that is truly integrated,
democratic, prosperous, and at peace, would realize a vision the United States launched
more than 50 years ago with the Marshall Plan and NATO. The greatest challenge to that
remains the integration of Southeastern Europe into the rest of Europe, a strategic
objective the United States shares with its NATO allies and the EU. The United States, its
allies, and the EU recognize that continued instability, ethnic conflict, and potentially open
warfare in Southeastern Europe would adversely affect European security and set back
the process of creating a Europe that is truly whole and free. Accordingly, our strategy
involves a series of interlocking building blocks, the progressive and interactive
implementation of which will achieve step-by-step shared objectives. The building blocks
identified below deﬁne our common priorities for Southeastern Europe, and -- more
importantly -- the pursuit of each helps the attainment of all:

- Coexistence among ethnic groups and the rebuilding of civic society;

- Promotion of the return of refugees and displaced persons to their homes to
undo the pernicious consequences of ethnic cleansing;

- Economic reform and revitalization, leading to sustainable economic growth;

- Democratic government based on the rule of law and full respect for human
rights;

- Support for the nascent democratic government in the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (FRY) as a means for advancing its return to the international
community;

- A peaceful resolution of the status of Montenegro and Kosovo through
arrangements acceptable to all sides;

- Strengthening regional cooperation as a basis for the region's revitalization and
eventual integration with the rest of Europe;

- Adherence to international agreements such as the Dayton Accords, especially
in recognition of international boundaries.

We are making progress towards our objectives. V\ﬁth the toppling of the Milosevic
regime and the ascension of President Kostunica and his government, the process of
transition from authoritarian rule to democratic governance is underway in the FRY. The
United States and the international community support democratization and economic
reform in the FRY to ensure long-lasting change, the removal of impediments to positive
social, political, and economic change, and the stability and growth of the entire region of
Southeastern Europe. Democratic consolidation and Western integration of the FRY will
not be easy, but the United States stands ready to contribute to the achievement of these
long-awaited goals.

Elsewhere in Southeastern Europe, elections in Croatia this year saw the victory of a pro-
Western, pro-reform government that has become a constructive and stabilizing force in
the region. Reform-minded leaders in Macedonia, Albania, and Slovenia continue to
press forward with difficult economic reforms. Croatia and Albania both became V\lTO
members this year, on the basis of commercially meaningful commitments that bolster
their economic reform programs. Moderate pro-Dayton elements share political power in
Bosnia. Kosovars had the opportunity to choose local leaders for the first time this year in
Kosovo's democratic elections, and relatively moderate candidates were elected by large
majorities. The FRY's new democratic leadership is moving quickly to integrate their
nation into Europe and restore constructive cooperation with its neighbors. But much
work remains. Economic and political reforms that will allow Southeastern European
nations to move forward towards European integration must be accelerated. While
Milosevic is out of power in the FRY, democratic change has not yet been consolidated
and the new government faces a difficult winter. Greater ethnic reconciliation in Bosnia
and Kosovo remains elusive. Security conditions allowing eventual withdrawal of U.S.
troops from the region have still not been fully realized. V\ﬁthout a broad strategy of
engagement and strong U.S. leadership, our vision ofa stable, democratic, and
prosperous Europe will not be realized.

Our second goal is to work with our allies and partners across the Atlantic to meet the
global challenges no nation can meet alone. This means working together to consolidate
this region's historic transition in favor of democracy and free markets; supporting peace
efforts in troubled areas both within and outside the region; tackling global threats such
as the potential use and continued proliferation of NBC weapons, terrorism, drug
trafficking, international organized crime, environmental, problems, or health crises; mass
uncontrolled migration of refugees, and building a more open world economy without
barriers to transatlantic trade and investment.

Our third goal is to develop the opportunities opened by the collapse of the Soviet Union
while minimizing the associated proliferation risks. Russia, Ukraine, and the other New
Independent States (NIS) today are undergoing fundamental changes to their political,
economic, and social systems -- the outcome will have a profound impact on our own
future and security. Core U S. security interests are being advanced through our
engagement with these countries, such as through U.S. efforts to help secure and
dismantle the former Soviet arsenal of weapons of mass destruction. Our engagement
also helps frame the key choices that only the peoples of the former Soviet Union and
their leaders can make about their future, their role in world affairs, and the shape of their
domestic political and economic institutions. Our strategy utilizes a long-term vision for
the region, recognizing that this unprecedented period of transition will take decades, if
not generations to complete.

Enhancing Security

NATO remains the anchor of U.S. engagement in European security matters, the
foundation for assuring collective defense of Alliance members, and the linchpin of
transatlantic security. As the leading guarantor of European security and a force for
European stability, NATO must play a leading role in promoting a more integrated and
secure Europe; one prepared to respond to new challenges. At the same time, the United
States actively supports the efforts of our European partners to develop their own
European Security and Defense Policy (ESDP). We further support European efforts to
increase and improve capabilities for collective defense and crisis response operations,
including the capability to act militarily under the EU when NATO, as a whole, is not
engaged. We seek a relationship that will benefit current, and the potential future,
members of both organizations, and we intend to remain fully engaged in European
security issues, both politically and militarily. The United States has maintained
approximately 100,000 military personnel in Europe to fulfill our commitments to NATO.
They provide a visible deterrent against aggression and coercion, contribute to regional
stability, respond to crises, sustain our vital transatlantic ties, and preserve U.S.
leadership in NATO.

NATO is pursuing several initiatives to enhance its ability to respond to the new
challenges it will face in the 21 st century. At NATO's Fiftieth Anniversary Summit in April
1999, Alliance leaders adopted an expansive agenda to adapt and prepare NATO for
current and future challenges. This included an updated Strategic Concept, which
envisions a larger, more capable and more flexible Alliance, committed to collective
defense and able to undertake new missions. The Defense Capabilities Initiative (DCI)
aims to improve defense capabilities and interoperability among NATO military forces,
thus bolstering the effectiveness of multinational operations across the full spectrum of
Alliance missions, to include Partner forces where appropriate. NATO and the EU are
also forging a strategic partnership that will further reinforce European capabilities and
contributions to transatlantic security. NATO's WMD Initiative, the other activities of
NATO's senior groups on proliferation, and U.S. bilateral NBC defense cooperation with
key allies, will increase the ability of the Alliance to counter the threat of NBC weapons
and their means of delivery.

NATO enlargement has been a crucial element of the U.S. and Allied strategy to build an
undivided, peaceful Europe. At the April 1999 NATO Summit, the alliance welcomed the
entry of Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic as new members. The accession of
these three nations has made the Alliance stronger and has reinforced Europe's zone of
democratic stability.

Together with our allies, we are pursuing efforts to help other countries that aspire to
membership become the best possible candidates. These efforts include the NATO
Membership Action Plan and the Partnership for Peace. We are also continuing bilateral
programs to advance this agenda, such as the President's Warsaw Initiative, which is
playing a critical role in promoting Western-style reform of the armed forces of Central
and Eastern Europe, and Eurasia and helping them become more interoperable with
NATO. Some European nations do not desire NATO membership, but do desire
strengthened ties with the Alliance. The Partnership for Peace provides an ideal vehicle
for such relationships. It formalizes relations, provides a mechanism for mutual beneﬁcial
interaction, and establishes a sound basis for combined action, should that be desired.
This can be seen in the major contributions some Partnership for Peace members have
made to NATO missions in the Balkans. Also, on a bilateral basis, the United States has
concluded security of classified information agreements with all former Warsaw Pact
countries.

NATO is pursuing several other initiatives to enhance its ability to respond to new
challenges and deepen ties between the Alliance and Partner countries. NATO's Euro-
Atlantic Partnership Council continues to strengthen political dialogue and practical
cooperation with all partners, and the Alliance values its distinctive partnership with
Ukraine, which provides a framework for enhanced relations and practical cooperation.
We welcome Russia's re-engagement with NATO and Permanent Joint Council on the
basis of the 1997 NATO-Russia Founding Act. Our shared goal remains to deepen and
expand constructive Russian participation in the European security system.

The Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) has a key role to play
in enhancing Europe's stability. It provides the United States with a venue for developing
Europe's security architecture in a manner that complements our NATO strategy. In many
instances, cooperating through the OSCE to secure peace, deter aggression, and
prevent, defuse and manage crises, broadens international support for the resolution of a
particular security issue, and gives regional actors greater latitude to develop their own
stability mechanisms. The Charter also recognizes that European security in the 21st
century increasingly depends on building security within societies as well as security
between states. In Istanbul, President Clinton joined the other 29 parties to the Treaty on
Conventional Armed Forces in Europe (CFE) in signing the CFE Adaptation Agreement,
which will replace obsolete bloc-to-bloc force limitations with nationally-based ceilings
and provide for enhanced transparency of military forces through increased information
and more inspections. The United States will continue to give strong support to the OSCE
as our best choice to engage all the countries of Europe, the Caucasus, and Central Asia
in an effort to advance democracy, human rights and the rule of law, and to encourage
them to support one another when instability, insecurity, and human rights violations
threaten peace in the region.

Kosovo - Securing the Peace

On March 24,1999, after repeated attempts at diplomatic solutions had failed, NATO
intervened militarily to end a vicious campaign of ethnic cleansing launched by the
Milosevic regime in Belgrade against the ethnic Albanian community in Kosovo. During
the eleven-week air campaign that comprised Operation Allied Force, fourteen of the
Alliance's nineteen members participated in more than 38,000 combat sorties, almost
one third the number flown during the 1991 Desert Storm campaign. In the end, due to
the application of force in concert with continued international pressure, Milosevic
capitulated, agreeing to NATO's conditions including the return of all refugees, the
withdrawal of his military and police forces, and the deployment of an international civil
and military presence. This unprecedented display of alliance solidarity ended Be|grade's
reign of terror and prevented the real risk that violence in Kosovo would create turmoil
throughout the region, undermining its new, fragile democracies and reversing our
progress in Bosnia and Herzegovina. NATO's intervention also set the conditions for
creating a stable, peaceful, and democratic way of life in Kosovo.

Today, assisting the international community to accomplish those objectives is a NATO-
led force (KFOR) of approximately 40,000 personnel from nearly 35 countries (including
6,000 Americans) who continue to protect the peace achieved by last year's military
action. The United States never commits its military forces lightly; the decision to
contribute to KFOR was firmly grounded in the assessment that national interests, in
particular European security and stability, were at stake. At the same time, compared to
IFOR and SFOR, we were able to share more of the burden with our European allies,
with U.S. troops comprising only 15% of the NATO-led force.

The international community continues to assist refugees and displaced persons to return
to their homes and communities, a critical step to social renewal. To date, more than

898,000 Kosovars from diverse ethnic backgrounds have returned (many with the help of
KFOR).

Rebuilding infrastructure and promoting economic growth is critical to the hope that one
day Kosovo will have a sustainable free market economy. To this end, more than 36,000
new homes have been constructed and more than 70% of private enterprises have been
restarted since the end of the war. Much more remains to be done, but the list of
impressive economic achievements continues to grow. Supporting democratic institutions
and processes is crucial component of our strategy. In October 2000, free and open
municipal elections were held for the first time in Kosovo's history, a key step in
establishing the autonomous institutions necessary for the Kosovars to govern
themselves.

Finally, we continue to promote multiethnic reconciliation in recognition that real
democracy requires peaceful coexistence among all ethnic groups and credible
protection for minority rights. Statistics indicate a dramatic decline in crime over the past
year in Kosovo; however, sporadic ethnic violence still challenges the international
community and requires our vigilance.

Today, Kosovo is largely an international protectorate focused on rebuilding itself and
inculcating respect for the rule of law. As these intermediate goals are attained, however,
Kosovo will continue its journey toward becoming a self-administering democratic
community within a unified Europe. Kosovo's final status will ultimately be determined
through a political process. The United States will work closely with the EU to ensure that
the necessary political and economic environment exists to allow Kosovo's final status to
be resolved eventually.

Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) - Promoting
Democracy

The prospects for sustained peace, stability, and growth throughout the region have
improved with the removal of President Milosevic and the election of FRY President
Kostunica. President Kostunica's victory signaled the end of destructive and isolationist
policies of the Milosevic regime. His government has indicated a desire to seek a future
with Europe. The United States remains committed to the people of Serbia and we will
support the new democratic governments stated aspirations to reintegrate into Europe
and the international community, and to use the transition as an opportunity to foster
democracy and market reform in the FRY.

In Montenegro, the democratically elected government of President Djukanovic has made
signiﬁcant progress in implementing political and economic reforms. The United States
will continue to support Montenegro and encourage dialogue and negotiation between
Montenegro and the new democratic government in Belgrade.

In cooperation with our allies and the international community, efforts are underway to
reintegrate the FRY into regional and international organizations. For example, in
October 2000, the United States supported FRY admission into the Stability Pact and the
United Nations. In November 2000, the U.S. supported the FRY's entry into OSCE. The
FRY has also begun discussions with the IMF and World Bank on membership -- as one
of the successor states to the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia -- and has asked
to join the European Bankfor Reconstruction and Development (EBRD). To bolster the
FRY's democratic transition, the United States supported removal of the energy embargo
and the travel ban, while maintaining sanctions on financial transactions and trade that
could still beneﬁt Milosevic and his cronies. The United States is assessing Serbia's

immediate and long-term assistance and humanitarian needs, and is promoting dialogue
and negotiation between Montenegro, Kosovo and a new democratic Serb government.
While the success of the Kostunica government's effort to consolidate power and build
democracy is by no means certain, and while peace in the region remains fragile, the
United States stands ready to support the Serbian people at this historic moment in their
efforts to have the FRY become a productive member of the international community of
democracies.

Bosnia - Implementing Dayton

The full implementation of the Dayton Peace Accords is key to developing Bosnia as a
stable, peaceful and economically viable state within Southeastern Europe. Dayton
implementation will not only foster Bosnia's integration with Europe, but will also provide
the conditions for eventual withdrawal of U.S. troops. To that end, we continue to support
the return of refugees, implementation of political and economic reforms, the weakening
of the nationalist political parties‘ grip on political and economic power, the strengthening
of state institutions, the reform and integration of the Entity Armed Forces, and the
apprehension of remaining war criminals.

While Dayton implementation continues to be measured and incremental, we are making
progress. Refugee returns have increased significantly in 2000, in part due to a more
secure environment established by NATO-led forces and international ﬁnancial support.
The improved security situation has allowed SFOR to reduce the number of troops in
Bosnia from |FOR's initial commitment of 60,000 soldiers in 1995 to current levels of
20,800 -- a reduction by roughly two-thirds. Further progress in implementing Dayton will
allow for further reduction in our military presence.

Along with the international community, we continue to press Bosnian officials to
accelerate efforts to promote the rule of law, fight corruption, institute economic reforms
and create stable state institutions, including those associated with the armed forces.
Recent elections have seen growing political pluralism among the electorate and the
advancement of moderate, pro-Dayton parties. We seek to support these trends.

Bosnia has beneﬁted from dramatic political change in Croatia, where a reform-oriented
government was elected earlier this year. Upon taking power, the new government sent
Bosnian Croats the unequivocal message that their future was in Bosnia, not Croatia, and
that they should support the full implementation of the Dayton Accords. Croatia's new
political orientation has led to the rise of moderate forces in the dominant Bosnian Croat
political party and has resulted in a significant decline in Croatian support for the Bosnian
Croat component of the Federation army, a necessary step for full military integration in
the Federation.

Unfortunately, in the Republika Srpska (RS) some hard-line nationalists still resist efforts
to implement several Dayton objectives, from refugee returns to the arrest of war
criminals. While we have had some success in moving the Dayton process forward,
genuine and sustainable change in the Republika Srpska will depend in part on the
cooperation of the new government in the FRY. President Kostunica's public support for
the Dayton Accords is encouraging, but must be matched by concrete actions to
encourage Bosnian Serbs to pursue their future as part of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Finally, it is imperative to our objectives that remaining Bosnian war criminals are
apprehended and sent to The Hague. Consequently, we strongly support the efforts of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY). In 2000, six
additional indicted war criminals were transferred to the ICTY, five of whom were

detained by SFOR. The |CTY's work in the region has also benefited from the enhanced
cooperation offered by the new government in Croatia.

Cyprus and the Aegean

Tensions on Cyprus, Greek-Turkish disagreements in the Aegean, and Turkey's
relationship with the EU have serious implications for regional stability and the evolution
of European political and security structures. Our goals are to stabilize the region by
reducing long-standing Greek-Turkish tensions, pursuing a comprehensive settlement on
Cyprus, and supporting Turkey's full integration into European institutions. A democratic,
secular, stable, and Western-oriented Turkey is critical to these efforts and has supported
broader U.S. efforts to enhance stability in Bosnia, the nations of the former Soviet Union
and the Middle East, as well as to contain Iran and Iraq. The President's trip to Turkey
and Greece in November 1999 highlighted encouraging signs of progress for
reconciliation in the region, including talks on the Cyprus dispute that are being held
under the auspices of the UN in New York and Geneva. The EU's historic decision in
December 1999 at its Helsinki Summit to grant candidate status to Turkey -- which the
United States strongly encouraged -- reinforced the development of Greek-Turkish
rapprochement, while encouraging Turkey to expand its democracy and observance of
human rights for all its citizens.

The Baltic States

The special nature of our relationship with Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania is recognized in
the 1998 Charter of Partnership, which clariﬁes the principles upon which U.S. relations
with the Baltic States are based and provides a framework for strengthening ties and
pursuing common goals. These goals include integration of Latvia, Lithuania, and Estonia
into the transatlantic community and development of close, cooperative relationships
among all the states in Northeastern Europe. Through the Northern European Initiative
we seek to strengthen regional cooperation, enhance regional security and stability, and
promote the growth of Western institutions, trade and investment by bringing together the
governments and private sector interests in the Baltic and Nordic countries, Poland,
Germany, and Russia.

Northern Ireland

Historic progress was achieved in implementing the Good Friday Accord when, on
December 2, 1999, an inclusive power-sharing government was formed in Northern
Ireland, the principle of consent was accepted with respect to any change in the territorial
status of Northern Ireland, new institutions were launched for North-South cooperation on
the island of Ireland, and the Irish Republican Army named a representative to the
Independent International Commission on Decommissioning (IICD) of paramilitary
weapons (loyalist paramilitaries named their representatives to the IICD soon thereafter).
Although differences over the arms decommissioning issue led to suspension of the new
institutions on February 11, 2000, the institutions were restored on May 27 following
agreement between the British and Irish governments and political leaders. On June 25,
the IICD reported that international inspectors visited several IRA arms dumps and
concluded that the weapons were secure and could not be used without the IICD
becoming aware that this happened. The IRA announced on June 26 that it had
reestablished contact with the IICD. These developments followed continued progress in
promoting human rights and equality in Northern Ireland, including the introduction of
legislation to implement the important recommendations put forward for police reform in
the Patten Report issued on September 9, 1999. Disagreements over progress on
decommissioning of arms have affected progress.

The United States continues to work with the British and Irish governments and the
political leaders in Northern Ireland to achieve full implementation of the Good Friday
Accord. Working through the International Fund for Ireland and the private sector, we will
help the people seize the opportunities that peace will bring to attract new investment and
bridge the community divide, create new factories, workplaces, and jobs, and establish
new centers of learning for the 21 st century.

Russia and the Newly Independent States (NIS)

There is no historical precedent for the transition underway in Russia, Ukraine, and other
NIS. The United States has core national interests at stake in those endeavors and has
acted quickly to help people across the NIS to break the back of the Communist system.
But the USSR's collapse created new challenges. In Russia, for example, rigidity often
gave way to laxness and disorder -- too many rules were replaced by too few. The United
States‘ engagement with each of the NIS recognizes that their transformation will be a
long-term endeavor, with far-reaching implications for regional and global stability, as well
as disappointments and setbacks along the way.

Open elections are now commonplace in Russia, Ukraine, and most other NIS. We will
continue to engage with all these countries to improve their electoral processes and help
strengthen civil society by working with grassroots organization, independent media, and
emerging entrepreneurs. Though the transition from communism to market democracy is
far from complete, the NIS have reduced state controls over their economies and
instituted basic protections for private property. It is in our national interest to help them
develop the laws, institutions, and skills needed for a market democracy, to ﬁght crime
and corruption, and to advance human rights and the rule of law. The conflict in
Chechnya represents a major problem in Russia's post-Communist development and
relationship with the international community; the means Russia is using in Chechnya are
undermining its legitimate objective of upholding its territorial integrity and protecting
citizens from terrorism and lawlessness.

The United States strategy toward Russia and the NIS has made every American safer.
Threat reduction programs have assisted in the deactivation of former Soviet nuclear
warheads and greatly decreased the possibility of sensitive materials, technology,
expertise, or equipment falling into the wrong hands. We are working aggressively to
strengthen export controls in Russia and the other NIS and to stem proliferation of
sensitive missile and nuclear technology, as well as other WMD or advanced
conventional weapons to potential regional aggressors such as Iran. The Administration
has supported the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the NIS, including through
agreement on the adapted CFE Treaty, which was made possible by agreed schedules
for the withdrawal of Russian forces from Georgia and Moldova. The integration of
Russia, Ukraine, and other NIS with the new Europe and the international community
remains a key priority. Despite disagreements over NATO enlargement and the Kosovo
conflict, Russian troops serve shoulder-to-shoulder with U.S. and NATO forces in Kosovo
and Bosnia. The United States remains committed to further development of the NATO-
Russia relationship and the NATO-Ukraine distinctive partnership.

Our engagement with Russia, Ukraine, and other NIS is broad-based and draws upon
new ties and partnerships between U.S. and NIS cities, regions, universities, scientists,
students, and business people. United States assistance programs have helped these
countries begin to develop the laws and legal infrastructure necessary for the rule of law
as well as the building blocks of civil society. Still, the challenges ahead in each of these
areas are immense. Economic hardship, social dislocation, and rampant crime and
corruption threaten the foundations of democratic and law-based governance. Looming
environmental problems will complicate NIS governments‘ ability to develop appropriate

and effective responses and policies. Similarly, government pressure on independent
media, citizens groups, nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), and religious groups
remain a recurring source of concern.

We must continue our efforts to encourage strong and effective property laws and
practices in central and Eastern Europe. Such laws are a necessity for a society based
on the rule of law, and are a prerequisite for competing in international markets and
participating in Western institutions. A starting point is the enactment and enforcement of
laws providing for the restitution of property, seized during the Nazi and communist eras,
to rightful owners.

Promoting Prosperity

Europe is a key partner in America's global commercial engagement. Europe and the
United States produce almost half of all global goods and services; more than 60% of
total U.S. investment abroad is in Europe; commerce between us exceeds $1 billion
every day; and fourteen million workers on both sides of the Atlantic earn their livelihoods
from transatlantic commerce. As part of the New Transatlantic Agenda launched in 1995,
the United States and the EU agreed to take concrete steps to reduce barriers to trade
and investment through creation of an open New Transatlantic Marketplace and through
Mutual Recognition Agreements in goods that eliminate redundant testing and
certiﬁcation requirements. Our governments are also cooperating closely with the civil
society dialogues established under the New Transatlantic Agenda: the Transatlantic
Business Dialogue, Transatlantic Consumer Dialogue, Transatlantic Environment
Dialogue, and Transatlantic Labor Dialogue. These people-to-people dialogues create
opportunities for increased communication focusing on best practices, and can help their
governments identify and reduce barriers to greater transatlantic interaction. In return, our
governments should be committed to listen, learn, and facilitate.

Building on the New Transatlantic Agenda, the United States and the EU launched the
Transatlantic Economic Partnership in 1998 to deepen our economic relations, reinforce
our political ties and reduce trade frictions. The ﬁrst element of the initiative is reducing
barriers that affect manufacturing, agriculture, and services. In manufacturing, we are
focusing on standards and technical barriers that American businesses have identiﬁed as
the most significant obstacle to expanding trade. In agriculture, we are focusing on
regulatory barriers that have inhibited the expansion of agriculture trade, particularly in
the biotechnology area. In services, we seek to facilitate trade in specific service sectors,
thereby creating new opportunities for the service industries that are already so active in
the European market.

The second element of the Transatlantic Economic Partnership is a broader, cooperative
approach to addressing a wide range of trade issues. We will continue to refrain from
imposing duties on electronic transmissions and develop a work program in the V\lTO for
electronic commerce. We will seek to adopt common positions and effective strategies for
accelerating compliance with V\lTO commitments on intellectual property. We will seek to
promote government procurement opportunities, including promoting compatibility of
electronic procurement information and government contracting systems. To promote fair
competition, we will seek to enhance the compatibility of our procedures with potentially
signiﬁcant reductions in cost for U.S. companies.

The United States strongly supports the process of European integration embodied in the
EU. We support EU enlargement, and we are also encouraging bilateral trade and
investment in non-EU countries. We recognize that EU nations face signiﬁcant economic
challenges and that periods of economic stagnation have eroded public support for

funding outward-looking foreign policies and greater integration. We are working closely
with our European partners to expand employment, promote long-term growth, and
support the New Transatlantic Agenda.

V\ﬁthin Southeastern Europe, President Clinton and other international leaders launched
a relatively new addition to the security architecture of Europe in July 1999. Called the
"Stability Pact for Southeastern Europe," the pact is a historic partnership between the
international community and the countries of Southeastern Europe, designed to bolster
security and advance integration into the European and transatlantic mainstream by
accelerating the region's democratic and economic development. By reducing ethnic
conflict, promoting democratization and civil society, increasing trade and investment
opportunities and supporting regional cooperation, we are promoting stability and
prosperity in the region and providing a basis for greater integration into Europe.

Since the inception of the Stability Pact, donors have committed approximately $6 billion
in development assistance for the countries of Southeastern Europe. European countries
and institutions, together with international financial institutions, are providing over 85% of
this assistance. Of this $6 billion, the international community has pledged more than
$2.3 billion for over 200 "Quick Start" projects -- many of which are focused on energy,
water and transport infrastructure improvements that will have an immediate impact on
people's lives. All of the "Quick Start" projects are to be underway by the end of March
2001.

In support of economic development and reform in Southeastern Europe, the U.S. is
promoting increased investment throughout the region. OPIC has launched a $150
million equity investment fund that will invest in companies in a range of sectors,
including telecommunications, light manufacturing, distribution and consumer goods. The
United States and the EBRID have created a $150 million fund to provide technical
assistance and lending, in cooperation with local ﬁnancial institutions, to promote micro,
small and medium enterprise development in Southeast Europe. The United States will
work with the EBRID to expand the operation of this fund and other activities to
Montenegro.

To combat corruption and bureaucratic uncertainty, countries in the region have agreed
under the Stability Pact to increase efforts to promote transparency and the rule of law.
Under the agreed upon Anti-Corruption Initiative, each member country in the region has
committed to make domestic government procurements more transparent, take specific
measures to promote public service integrity, and establish a review body to monitor
accountability in the administration of foreign aid programs and national anti-corruption
efforts.

To promote deeper integration with the rest of Europe and transatlantic institutions, the
United States supports EU efforts to play a leading role in the Stability Pact and
welcomes closer relations between the EU and the countries of the region. We are urging
the EU to strengthen these ties and to act quickly on proposals to open further its
markets to Southeastern European products. As the United States‘ support (in October
and November 2000) for FRY admission into the Stability Pact, UN, and OSCE
demonstrates, guidelines like those expressed by the Stability Pact serve as worthy
benchmarks for inclusiveness into a wider circle of nations.

The United States will continue its strong support for the Stability Pact and broader
stabilization efforts. In October 2000, the FRY was formally admitted to join the Stability
Pact. The critical challenge for the Stability Pact in the coming months is to persuade the
international community and Southeastern Europe that it is in their mutual interests to
follow through on important commitments that each has made to the other.

Now that the government in Belgrade has changed, the United States is promoting
reintegration of the FRY into regional and international organizations. The energy
embargo and travel ban have been lifted, and we are working with the Europeans and
other donors to identify priorities for assistance and reconstruction, including Danube
River cleanup.

As in other areas in Central and Eastern Europe, as well as the NIS, the United States
will continue helping former planned economies integrate into international economic and
other institutions and develop healthy business climates. We will continue to promote
political and economic reform in Russia, working to create a thriving market economy
while guarding against corruption. By supporting historic market reforms in these areas,
we help new democracies take root by avoiding conditions, such as corruption and
poverty, that can weaken democratic governance and erode the appeal of democratic
values.

We are working with many NIS countries to promote their accession to the V\lTO on
commercially fair terms. Building on successful accession of Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Estonia,
Georgia, Albania, Croatia, and Moldova, we have made significant progress on the
accession of Armenia and Lithuania. We also have held fruitful discussions on V\lTO with
Russia and Ukraine. We will continue to mobilize the international community to provide
assistance to support reform and to help the Central and Eastern European and NIS
countries stimulate foreign and domestic private investment. We are also encouraging
investment in these countries, especially by U.S. companies.

We focus particular attention on promoting the development of Caspian energy resources
and their export to world markets, thereby expanding and diversifying world energy
supplies and promoting prosperity in the region.

Getting Caspian energy to world markets will help achieve important goals. It will help
enhance prospects for prosperity and independence of the Caspian states. It can help
support the development of stable democratic countries, and bolster relationships among
the states. Development of Caspian energy resources will improve our energy security,
as well as that of Turkey and other allies. It will create commercial opportunities for U.S.
companies and other companies around the world. Throughout the region, targeted
exchange programs have familiarized key decision makers and opinion molders with the
workings of our democracy.

The independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity, and democratic and economic reform
of the NIS are important to U.S. interests. To advance these goals, we are utilizing our
bilateral relationships and our leadership of international institutions to mobilize
governmental and private resources. But the circumstances affecting the smaller
countries depend in significant measure on the fate of reform in the largest and most
powerful -- Russia. The United States will continue to promote Russian reform and
international integration, and to build on the progress that already has been made. Our
economic and political support for the Russian government depends on its commitment
to internal reform and a responsible foreign policy.

Promoting Democracy and Human Rights

Democratic reforms in Central and Eastern Europe and Eurasia are the best measures to
avert conditions that could foster ethnic violence and regional conflict. Already, the
prospect ofjoining or rejoining the Western democratic family through NATO, the EU,
and other institutions has strengthened the forces of democracy and reform in many
countries of the region and encouraged them to settle long-standing disputes over

borders and ethnic minorities. Together with our West European partners we are helping
these nations build civil societies.

We continue to promote the integration of Southeastern Europe's democracies into the
European mainstream by promoting democratic, economic and military reforms,
deepening regional cooperation, and supporting regional efforts to fight organized crime.
The opening of a Southeast Europe Cooperation Initiative (SECI) information
clearinghouse in Bucharest in the spring of 1999 highlighted efforts by SECI to integrate
the efforts of national law enforcement agencies in the fight against cross-border crime.
The UN, EU, and NATO operations in the area focused on developing professional civil
and military institutions that are respectful and promote human rights and respect for civil
authority. Landmark democratic elections in Croatia at the beginning of 2000, and
important regional elections, such as those held in Montenegro in June 2000, showed
promise for the process of democracy. Where the democratic transition is still in
progress, or threatened by external influences, the situation bears continued vigilance. In
Kosovo, where violence continued to plague efforts to restore stability, promote
tolerance, and begin the establishment of a Kosovar capacity for substantial self-rule, we
are determined to succeed in the protection of the rights of individual minorities and the
implementation of an ambitious democratic framework for the people of Kosovo.

Municipal elections in Kosovo have paved the way for the establishment of local
institutions as the international community encourages the creation of a constitutional
framework for Kosovar autonomy called for under the Ramboulliet Agreement and UN
Security Council Resolution 1244. As local Kosovars accept responsibility for the process
of democracy and protection of minority rights, our efforts in Kosovo will shift from a focus
on military security and the training of international and indigenous police forces, to
deepened support for those civil efforts that promote democracy, the rule of law, and
respect for human rights.

We continue to support the efforts of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia. In 2000, the pace of detention, transfer, and prosecution of indicted war
criminals remained brisk, especially as the new government in Croatia reaffirmed that
country's support for the implementation of the Dayton Agreements. New opportunities
have also opened with the change of government in Belgrade. We and our European
allies have made clear to President Kostunica his obligation to cooperate with the ICTY
and our expectation that all indicted war criminals, including former President Milosevic,
will be held accountable.

East Asia and the Pacific

Our regional strategy is based on the premise that a stable and prosperous East Asia
and Pacific is vital to our own national security interests. United States leadership in
expanding mutually beneficial economic relationships and U.S. security commitments
within the Pacific rim are central to stability, and even more importantly, they foster an
environment within which all Asia/Paciﬁc nations can prosper. We continue to advance
this vision of the Asia/Pacific by promoting democracy and human rights, advancing
economic integration and rules-based trade, and enhancing security. These three pillars
of our security strategy for Asia are mutually reinforcing, and provide the framework for
our bilateral and multilateral initiatives. Cooperation with our allies and friends in the
region to achieve our common goals remains a cornerstone of our strategy.

Enhancing Security

Our military presence and our strong bilateral security ties have been essential to
maintaining the peace and security that have enabled most nations in the Asia-Pacific
region to build thriving economies for the benefit of all. To deter aggression and secure
our own interests, we maintain about 100,000 military personnel in the region in
cooperation with our allies and partners. The U.S.-Japan security alliance anchors the
U.S. presence in the Asia-Pacific region. Our continuing security role is further reinforced
by our bilateral treaty alliances with the Republic of Korea (ROK), Australia, Thailand and
the Philippines. We maintain healthy relations with the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) and support regional dialogue -- such as in the ASEAN Regional
Forum (ARF) -- on the full range of common security challenges.

Our security strategy in East Asia and the Pacific encompasses a broad range of
potential threats, and includes the following priorities: deterring aggression and promoting
peaceful resolution of crises; promoting access to and the security of sea lines of
communication in cooperation with our allies and partners; actively promoting our
nonproliferation goals and safeguarding nuclear technology; strengthening both active
and passive counterproliferation capabilities of key allies; combating the spread of
transnational threats, including drug-trafﬁcking, piracy, terrorism and the spread of AIDS;
fostering bilateral and multilateral security cooperation, with a particular emphasis on
combating transnational threats and enhancing future cooperation in peacekeeping
operations; and promoting regional dialogue through bilateral talks and multilateral fora.

Japan

The U.S.-Japan alliance remains the cornerstone for achieving common security
objectives and maintaining a peaceful and prosperous environment for the Asia Pacific
region. The 1997 revised Guidelines for U.S.-Japan Defense Cooperation create a solid
basis for more effective and credible U.S.-Japan cooperation in peacetime, in the event
of an armed attack on Japan, and in situations in areas surrounding Japan. They provide
a general framework for the roles and missions of the two countries, and facilitate
coordination in peacetime and contingencies. The revised Guidelines, like the U.S.-Japan
security relationship itself, are not directed against any other country; rather, they enable
the U.S.-Japan alliance to continue fostering peace and security throughout the region. In
April 1998, in order to support the new Guidelines, both governments agreed to a revised
Acquisition and Cross-Servicing Agreement (ACSA) that expands the provision of
supplies and services to include reciprocal provision of logistics support during situations
surrounding Japan that have an important influence on Japan's peace and security.
Japan approved implementing legislation for the Guidelines in the spring of 1999. Japan's
generous host-nation support for the U.S. overseas presence also serves as a critical
strategic contribution to the alliance and to regional security.

Our bilateral security cooperation has broadened as a result of recent agreements to
undertake joint research and development on theater missile defense and to cooperate
on Japan's indigenous satellite program. Moreover, we work closely with Japan to
promote regional peace and stability, seek universal adherence to the Nuclear
Nonproliferation Treaty, and address the dangers posed by transfers of destabilizing
conventional arms and sensitive dual-use technologies. Japan is providing $1 billion to
the Korean Peninsula Energy Development Organization (KEDO), and consults closely
with the United States and ROK on issues relating to North Korea.

Korean Peninsula

Tensions on the Korean Peninsula, albeit reduced as a result of the June 2000 North-
South Summit, remain the leading threat to peace and stability in East Asia. The
Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK) has publicly stated a preference for
peaceful reunification, but continues to dedicate a large portion of its dwindling resources
to its huge military forces. Renewed military conflict has been prevented since 1953 by a
combination of the Armistice Agreement, which brought an end to open hostilities; the
United Nations Command, which has visibly represented the will of the UN Security
Council to secure peace; the physical presence of U.S. and ROKtroops in the Combined
Forces Command, which has demonstrated the a||iance's resolve; and, increasingly,
diplomatic activities of the United States, ROK, and Japan.

President Kim Dae-jung continues to pursue a course toward peace and stability on the
Korean peninsula, seeking new channels of dialogue with North Korea and developing
areas of cooperation between South and North. During their June 2000 meeting in Tokyo,
President Clinton and President Kim affirmed the importance of the North-South Summit
for building a more permanent peace, and the indispensability of the strong U.S.-ROK
defense alliance as a stabilizing pillar for the region. The United States is working to
create conditions of stability by maintaining solidarity with our South Korean and
Japanese allies, emphasizing America's commitment to shaping a peaceful and
prosperous Korean Peninsula, and ensuring that a struggling North Korea does not opt
for a military solution to its political and economic problems.

Peaceful resolution of the Korean conflict with a democratic, non-nuclear, reunified
peninsula will enhance peace and security in the East Asian region and is clearly in our
strategic interest. We have taken steps to improve bilateral political and economic ties
with North Korea -- consistent with the objectives of our alliance with the ROK -- to draw
the North into more normal relations with the region and the rest of the world. Secretary
Albright furthered that objective during her historic meeting with North Korean leader Kim
Jong 11 in late October 2000. The United States has also outlined to the DPRK what
steps it must take to cut all ties to terrorism, and be considered for removal from the list of
state sponsors of terrorism. But our willingness to continue to improve bilateral relations
will continue to be commensurate with the North's cooperation in efforts to reduce
tensions on the peninsula and to stem its NBC weapons programs.

South Korea has set an example for nonproliferation by accepting the 1991
Denuclearization Agreement, agreeing to IAEA safeguards, and developing a peaceful
nuclear program that brings benefits to the region. We are firm that North Korea must
maintain the freeze on production and reprocessing of fissile material, dismantle its
graphite-moderated reactors and related facilities, and fully comply with its NPT
obligations under the Agreed Framework. The United States, too, must fulfill its
obligations under the Agreed Framework, and the Administration will work with the
Congress to ensure the success of our efforts to address the North Korean nuclear
threat.

Beyond fully implementing the Agreed Framework, we seek to eliminate North Korea's
indigenous and export missile program and their weapons of mass destruction through a
step-by-step process. Based on U.S.-North Korean discussions, North Korea has
undertaken to refrain from flight testing long-range missiles of any kind as we move
toward more normal relations. Working closely with our ROK and Japanese allies, we will
improve relations with North Korea on the basis of it moving forward on the missile and
WMD agendas, and we will take necessary measures in the other direction if the North
chooses to go down a different path.

We encourage the North to work with South Korea to implement the agreements reached
at the North-South Summit; continue the United Nations Command-Korean People's
Army General Officer Dialogue at Panmunjom; participate constructively in the Four Party
Talks among the United States, China, and North and South Korea to reduce tensions
and negotiate a peace agreement; and continue our efforts to recover the remains of
American servicemen missing since the Korean War.

Pyongyang's more recent diplomatic and economic outreach to the rest of the world are
encouraging, but as yet no reciprocal confidence-building measures have been
forthcoming. It is crucial that the United States and the ROK maintain deterrence during
the process of reconciliation and economic integration on the Korean Peninsula. We
favor a step by step process of using reciprocal confidence building measures that link
economic and diplomatic initiatives to real reductions in the military threat on the
peninsula.

China

A stable, open, prosperous People's Republic of China (PRC) that respects the rule of
law and assumes its responsibilities for building a more peaceful world is clearly and
profoundly in our interests. The prospects for peace and prosperity in Asia depend
heavily on China's role as a responsible member of the international community. Our
policy toward China is both principled and pragmatic, expanding our areas of cooperation
while dealing forthrightly with our differences.

In recent years, the United States and China have taken a number of steps to strengthen
cooperation in international affairs: intensive diplomatic work to restore relations
damaged by our mistaken bombing of the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade; successful
conclusion of a bilateral agreement on Chinese VVTO accession; two presidential bilateral
meetings in 2000; regular exchanges of visits by cabinet and sub-cabinet officials to
consult on political, military, security, nonproliferation, arms control, economic, financial,
and human rights issues; cooperating in efforts to account for Americans missing as a
result of World War II and the Korean War; establishing a consultation mechanism to
strengthen military maritime safety; holding discussions on humanitarian assistance and
disaster relief, and environmental security; and establishing working groups on law
enforcement cooperation. China is also a participant in science, technology, and health
research. Our cooperation in promoting environmental protection and sustainable
development is steadily increasing to the benefit of U.S. interests in the Asia-Paciﬁc
region.

At the same time, China's rise as a major power presents an array of potential
challenges. Many of China's neighbors are closely monitoring China's growing defense
expenditures and modernization of the People's Liberation Army (PLA). Given
international and regional focus on China's growing military power, China's adherence to
multilateral nonproliferation and arms control regimes, as well as increased military
transparency, is of growing importance.

United States interests have been advanced in discussions with China on arms control
and nonproliferation issues. We have advanced our dialogue on nonproliferation and
arms control through exchanges at the Secretary of Defense, Secretary of State, and
sub-cabinet level in 1999 and 2000, building on previous accomplishments. The United
States and China announced in earlier exchanges that they will not target their strategic
nuclear weapons at each other and conﬁrmed their common goal of halting the spread of
WMD. Both our nations have signed the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty. We have
consulted on the Missile Technology Control Regime and missile nonproliferation, and we

continue to press China to exercise restraint in its missile policies and practices. In
November 2000, China publicly announced that it would reinforce its export control
system, and that it had no intention to assist any country in the development of ballistic
missiles that could be used to deliver nuclear weapons. Both nations have ratiﬁed the
Chemical Weapons Convention, and China has further strengthened its controls on the
export of dual-use chemicals and related production equipment and technology to assure
they are not used for production of chemical weapons. Both nations have called for
strengthening of the Biological Weapons Convention and early conclusion of a protocol
establishing a practical and effective mechanism to enhance compliance and improve
transparency. We also reached agreement with China on practices for end-use visits on
U.S. high technology exports to China and we will continue a dialogue on implementation
of this agreement.

China is working with the United States on important regional security issues. On the
Korean Peninsula, the United States and China share an interest in peace and stability
and worked together to support the June 2000 North-South Summit. We have both
worked to convince North Korea to freeze its dangerous nuclear program, and believe the
four-party peace talks are an important tool in working toward establishment of peace
and stability in Northeast Asia.

To help maintain peace, security, and stability in the Western Pacific, and to promote our
broad foreign policy objectives, we are implementing fully the terms of the Taiwan
Relations Act by maintaining unofﬁcial relations between the American people and the
people of Taiwan. We are keeping the focus on peaceful resolution by working
assiduously to encourage the PRC and Taiwan to reestablish direct dialogue, while
maintaining our firm commitment to Taiwan's self-defense by providing defensive arms to
Taiwan.

Our key security objectives for the future include: sustaining the strategic dialogue begun
by the recent summits and other high-level exchanges; enhancing stability in the Taiwan
Strait by maintaining our "one China" policy, promoting peaceful resolution of cross-Strait
issues, and encouraging dialogue between Beijing and Taipei; strengthening China's
adherence to international nonproliferation norms, particularly with respect to export
controls on ballistic missile and dual-use technologies; encouraging China to adopt
broader, more effective export control policies; achieving greater openness and
transparency in China's military; encouraging a constructive PRC role in international
affairs through active cooperation in multilateral fora such as the ASEAN Regional Forum
(ARF) and the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation Forum (APEC); and improving law
enforcement cooperation in such areas as counterterrorism, counternarcotics, and
migrant trafﬁcking.

Southeast Asia and the Pacific

Our strategic interest in Southeast Asia centers on developing regional, multilateral, and
bilateral security and economic relationships that assist in conﬁict prevention and
resolution. United States security objectives in the region are: strengthening our security
alliances and partnerships with Australia, Thailand, the Philippines, and Singapore;
sustaining facilities access arrangements with these countries and other ASEAN nations;
and encouraging effective multilateral cooperation by expanding participation in regional
exercises geared toward disaster relief operations and combating such transnational
threats as piracy and drug-trafficking. We continue to view ASEAN as the key regional
institution for enhancing security and prosperity. We will continue to work on our
relationship with ASEAN and enhance our multilateral security dialogue under the ARF.
We must also pursue multilateral, or sometimes bilateral, initiatives with ASEAN to
address transnational issues such as the spread of infectious disease, alien smuggling,

trafficking in women and children, environmental protection, and combating organized
crime, particularly the flow of heroin from Burma and other countries in the region.

Promoting Prosperity

A prosperous and open Asia/Pacific is key to the economic health of the United States.
Thirty percent of U.S. exports go to Asia, supporting millions of U.S. jobs, and we export
more to Asia than Europe. The economic beneﬁts of a strong Asia/Pacific are likely to
increase as China and Taiwan enter into the VVTO. Our historic decision to grant
Permanent Normal Trade Relations to China will enable U.S. businesses to expand into
China under a rules-based trading regime.

Our economic objectives in the region include the following: continuing recovery from the
financial crisis; furthering progress within APEC toward liberalizing trade and investment;
increasing U.S. exports to Asia/Pacific countries through market-opening measures and
leveling the playing field for U.S. business; and concluding the V\lTO accession
negotiations for the PRC and Taiwan on satisfactory commercial terms.

Our strategy to meet these objectives has four key elements: support for economic
reforms and market liberalization; working with international financial institutions to
provide well-targeted economic and technical assistance in support of economic reforms;
providing bilateral humanitarian aid and contingency bilateral financial assistance if
needed; and urging strong policy actions by Japan and the other major economic powers
to promote global growth.

The United States will continue to work with the IMF, the World Bank, other international
financial institutions, the governments in the region, and the private sector to strengthen
financial markets, bolster investor confidence, and deepen on-going reforms in the
region's economies. In doing so, we will remain mindful of the need to promote protection
of worker rights. We will continue to encourage South Korea, Thailand, and Indonesia to
implement economic reforms to lay a solid basis for long-term economic growth. U.S.
initiatives in APEC will open new opportunities for economic cooperation and permit U.S.
companies to expand their involvement in substantial infrastructure planning and
construction throughout the region. We will continue our efforts to encourage all Asia
Paciﬁc nations to pursue open markets.

China

Integrating the PRC more fully into the global trading system is manifestly in our national
interest. China is a major potential market for our goods and services. Our exports to
China already support hundreds of thousands ofjobs across our country and China's
V\lTO entry will signiﬁcantly expand that number.

An important part of integrating China into the market-based world economic system is
opening China's highly protected market through elimination of trade barriers and
removal of distorting restraints on economic activity. We have negotiated and vigorously
enforced landmark agreements to combat piracy of intellectual property and advance the
interests of our creative industries. We have also negotiated -- and vigorously enforced --
agreements on textile trade. We will continue to press China to open its markets as it
engages in sweeping economic reform, and to respect and adhere to core labor
standards as codified by the ILO. Most recently, the United States reached a market
access agreement with China, paving the way for China's accession to the World Trade
Organization. The bilateral agreement concluded in November 1999 will create jobs and

opportunities for Americans through the opening of Chinese markets, promote economic
reform in China, and enhance the understanding of the Chinese people of the rule of law
in the development of their domestic civil society in compliance with international
obligations. We are now working with other Working Party members to complete the
multilateral negotiation of China's V\lTO accession. Our enactment of Permanent Normal
Trade Relations status for China will accelerate and expand these favorable trends.

Japan

Japan has a crucial role to play in Asia's economic health: generating substantial growth
to help maintain a growing world economy and absorb a growing share of imports from
emerging markets We have urged Japan to reform its financial sector, stimulate domestic
demand, deregulate its economy, and further open its markets to foreign goods and
services. The Administration continues to make progress on increasing market access in
Asia's largest economy. Since the beginning of the first Clinton Administration, the United
States and Japan have reached 39 trade agreements designed to open Japanese
markets in such key sectors as autos and auto parts, civil aviation, and insurance. In the
Enhanced Initiative on Deregulation, Japan agreed to regulatory reforms to promote
domestic demand-led growth and also to increase business opportunities for U.S. firms in
such vital areas as telecommunications, competition policy enforcement, and
medical/pharmaceutical products. Through the Foreign Direct Investment Initiative, Japan
agreed to measures to improve the environment for foreign investment. As a result, U.S.
firms are increasing their presence in the Japanese market by acquiring Japanese firms,
and are thereby contributing to Japan's economic recovery. The Administration also has
intensiﬁed efforts to monitor and enforce trade agreements with Japan to ensure that they
are fully implemented. The United States also uses multilateral venues, such as V\lTO
dispute settlement and negotiation of new multilateral agreements, to further open
markets and accomplish our trade objectives with Japan. The U.S.-Japan Common
Agenda is a bilateral U.S.-Japan program coordinating scientific and financial resources
of the world's two largest economies on more than seventy projects worldwide. The
projects focus on eradicating infectious disease, protecting the environment, and
promoting scientific and technological cooperation.

Republic of Korea

The United States will continue its strong support for South Korean efforts to reform its
economy, liberalize trade and investment, strengthen the banking system, and implement
the IMF program. We will also continue to explore concrete steps to promote growth in
both our countries, more fully open our markets, and further integrate the Republic of
Korea into the global economy.

Southeast Asia and the Pacific

The United States strongly supports efforts to sustain and strengthen economic recovery
in the ten nations of ASEAN. We accomplish this by maintaining our open market for
Southeast Asian goods and services as well as our support for IMF-led recovery
programs for several ASEAN nations. There are challenges ahead. Thailand's economic
recovery is continuing, however, high oil prices and the slow pace of banking and
corporate sector reforms are impeding Thailand's full economic recovery from the
financial crisis. Thais are preparing for elections in January 2001. The survival and
vindication of Thailand's new constitution would reflect well on the future of democracy in
Southeast Asia, but the Thais worry about political stability ahead. In Indonesia, slow
progress on corporate and ﬁnancial sector restructuring endangers economic recovery.
Rapid sale of assets held by the Indonesian Bank Restructuring Agency (IBRA) is the key

to alleviating the large public debt burden and improving investor sentiment. IBRA has
begun to move ahead, but without stronger support from the government, progress will
remain uneven. Privatization of the banking sector, which has been largely under
government control since the crisis, is another area of worrying policy drift. V\ﬁth Vietnam,
we are working toward completion of a broad commercial agreement that will open that
country's markets, promote economic reform, and open the way for congressional
approval of Normal Trade Relations for Vietnam. Nearby in Singapore, in November
2000, President Clinton and Prime Minister Goh of Singapore agreed to launch
negotiations for a free trade agreement. In addition to the economic benefits both
countries would be expected to gain, the two leaders have recognized the importance of
continued U.S. engagement in Asia based on economic and security interests. Working
with ASEAN members to address environmental degradation -- from forest fires and
haze, to fisheries depletion and deforestation -- while striving for sustainable economic
growth, is a high priority.

Australia and New Zealand

We will continue to build on our close working relationship with Australia and New
Zealand to strengthen our bilateral trade and economic relationships. We will also work
with these two key partners to develop international support for further action by APEC
and by the World Trade Organization to develop rules-based trade and encourage sector
liberalization.

Promoting Democracy and Human Rights

The United States will continue to support the democratic aspirations of Asian/Pacific
peoples and to promote respect for human rights. Our strategy is best served through
close coordination with our allies and friends in the region, both at the governmental and
non-governmental organization level. Our priorities include: progress on human rights,
religious freedom and rule of law issues in China; a meaningful political dialogue between
the ruling authorities in Burma and the democratic opposition; supporting Indonesia's
democratic transition; and contributing to East Timor's transition to independence.

Indonesia

The United States strongly supports a united, prosperous, and democratic Indonesia that
plays a positive role in regional security. The October 1999 election was a historic

moment for Indonesia, putting it on course to become the world's third largest democracy.

We continue to assist Indonesia in managing the considerable challenges of national
reconciliation, democratic reform and economic recovery. We have tailored a
comprehensive assistance package focused on: economic development; humanitarian
assistance and infrastructure development in strife-torn areas; and technical assistance
in key government sectors designed to reinforce the democratic process and the rule of
law.

Burma

The United States will continue to work with other concerned states to create the
conditions for a meaningful dialogue between the regime and the democratic opposition
led by Aung San Suu Kyi. Our strategy includes investment and other sanctions to
increase pressure on the regime to respect basic human rights. At the same time, we
support the efforts of the United Nations Secretary General to use his good offices to
promote dialogue leading to a democratic transition.

East Timor

The UN Transitional Authority in East Timor (UNTAET), established in October 1999,
followed on the success of the UN-sanctioned International force in East Timor
(INTERFET). The UN-Sanctioned International Force in East Timor was an Australian-led
mission that deployed in September 1999, with U.S. support, to quell the post-
referendum violence in East Timor. The UN Transitional Authority in East Timor took over
security responsibilities from INTERFET in February 2000. UNTAET has continued to
further the goal of an independent and viable East Timor. Our contributions have a strong
impact on UNTAET's success. We are providing long-term development assistance and
transitional employment opportunities to the East Timorese people, as well as financial
and technical support for the UN transition administration. Our military forces have
provided on-going health and infrastructure support directly to the East Timorese people,
and have maintained a presence to coordinate humanitarian and civic assistance
projects. We remain committed to attaining a durable solution to the plight of East
Timorese refugees in Indonesia. A challenge for the future is assisting with the
establishment of a small yet viable East Timor Defense Force.

The Western Hemisphere

Our hemisphere enters the 21st century with an unprecedented opportunity to secure a
future of stability and prosperity-building on the fact that virtually all nations in the
hemisphere are democratic and committed to free market economies. The end of armed
conflict in Central America and other improvements in regional security have coincided
with remarkable political and economic progress throughout the Americas. The people of
the Americas are taking advantage of the vast opportunities being created as emerging
markets are connected through electronic commerce and as maturing democracies allow
individuals to more fully express their preferences. Sub-regional political, economic, and
security cooperation in North America, the Caribbean, Central America, the Andean
region, and the Southern Cone have contributed positively to peace and prosperity
throughout the hemisphere. Equally important, the people of the Americas have
reaffirmed their commitment to combat together the difﬁcult threats posed by drug
trafficking and corruption. The United States, which helped shape this new climate in the
hemisphere, seeks to secure its beneﬁts while safeguarding our citizens against these
threats.

Enhancing Security

Our strategy of engagement in the Western Hemisphere has included strengthening and
expanding U.S. defense cooperation with friends throughout the region, and supporting
their efforts to institute democratic norms within their defense establishments including
civilian control, transparency, and public accountability. As these democratic norms take
root, regional confidence builds. The United States also will continue working to
strengthen regional and sub-regional cooperative security mechanisms that could serve
to deepen regional confidence and foster sustained regional stability. We will continue to
offer our strong support for the peaceful resolution of disputes in the region, and will
encourage continued dialogue and peaceful engagement among nations of the region to
achieve this goal. While respecting sovereignty concerns, we remain committed to
promoting cooperative approaches throughout the hemisphere to international
peacekeeping threats and humanitarian crises.

The principal threats to hemispheric stability are transnational in nature, such as drug
trafficking, money laundering, illegal immigration, firearms trafﬁcking, and terrorism. In

addition, our hemisphere is leading the way in recognizing the dangers to national and
regional stability produced by corruption and ineffective judicial systems. All of these
produce adverse social effects at home and undermine the sovereignty, democracy, and
national security of nations in the hemisphere.

Particularly pernicious is the threat of drug trafficking. Working with the OAS and other
organizations, we seek to eliminate the scourge of drug trafficking in our hemisphere.
Countries of the hemisphere are striving to better organize and coordinate efforts to
extradite and prosecute individuals charged with drug trafficking and related crimes;
combat money laundering; seize assets used in criminal activity; halt illicit trafﬁc in
precursors and essential chemicals; strike at the ﬁnancial support networks; enhance
national drug abuse awareness and treatment programs; and drastically curtail illicit
crops through alternative development and eradication programs. In the Caribbean, and
bilaterally with Mexico and Colombia, we are working to increase counterdrug and law
enforcement cooperation.

At the same time, we recognize linkages between the threats posed to the United States
as the principal consumer of illicit drugs and related threats posed to source countries
and transit zone states. Accordingly, as we seek to expand regional cooperation in the
counterdrug arena, we recognize our obligation to aggressively combat the illegal export
of U.S.-origin weapons to criminal and insurgent groups that are engaged in, or beneﬁt
from, drug trafficking.

Colombia is of special importance because drug trafficking is fueling the longest running
internal conﬂict in the region. The combination of armed insurgents, growing paramilitary
movement, corruption, and economic malaise extends beyond its borders and has
implications for regional peace and security. To turn the tide, the United States is
providing the Colombian Government assistance to wage a comprehensive effort to
promote the mutually reinforcing goals of peace, illicit drug control, economic
development, and respect for human rights. The Government of Colombia has developed
a comprehensive six-year strategy, Plan Colombia, to revive its economy, strengthen the
democratic pillars of society, promote the peace process, and reduce drug production
and trafficking. We are providing significant assistance for Plan Colombia in a manner
that will concurrently promote U.S. and Colombian interests, and we will encourage our
allies and international institutions to do the same.

The extent of bilateral cooperation with Mexico in the fight against drug trafficking is
unprecedented. We have created the High-Level Contact Group and a variety of working
groups to reach a joint diagnosis and settle on a common strategy. Moreover, the
mutually agreed upon Performance Measures of Effectiveness will allow us to better
evaluate our counterdrug efforts. We are working together to reduce demand for illegal
drugs, combat money laundering, avoid the misuse of precursors and essential
chemicals, stop the illegal trafficking of arms or migrants, broaden our ability to intercept
drugs, and apprehend those who are involved in drug trafﬁcking.

Promoting Prosperity

Economic growth and integration in the Americas will profoundly affect the prosperity of
the United States in the 21st century. This begins with our immediate neighbors, Canada
and Mexico. Since the 1989 U.S.-Canada Free Trade Agreement, and subsequently the
1993 North American Free Trade Agreement, our trade with Canada and Mexico has
grown rapidly. Canada remains our largest trade partner, and Mexico has become our
second largest trading partner. The United States and Mexico have also resolved
important trade differences, made progress toward easier access for the relevant

products of both nations, and consolidated our trade area as one of the most powerful in
the world. In the hemisphere as a whole, our trade initiatives offer a historic opportunity to
capitalize on and strengthen the unprecedented trend toward democracy and free market
economics.

We seek to advance the goal of an integrated hemisphere of free market democracies by
building on NAFTA. Formal negotiations are in progress to initiate the Free Trade Area of
the Americas (FTAA) by 2005. The negotiations cover a broad range of important issues,
including market access, investment, services, government procurement, dispute
settlement, agriculture, intellectual property rights, competition policy, subsidies, anti-
dumping, and countervailing duties. We will seek to ensure that the agreement also
supports workers‘ rights, environmental protection and sustainable development. To
address the concerns of smaller economies prior to completion of the FTAA, and in light
of the increased competition NAFTA presents, we have obtained Congressional approval
for enhanced trade preferences offered to Central American and Caribbean countries
under the Caribbean Basin Trade Partnership Act.

The United States will continue its effective partnership with the IMF, the World Bank, the
Inter-American Development Bank, the governments of Latin America, and the private
sector to help the region's countries in their transition to integrated, market economies. A
key target of this partnership is assisting the reform and recovery of banking sectors hurt
by financial market turmoil over the past several years. We will continue to support
financial and economic reform efforts in Brazil and Argentina to reduce their vulnerability
to external shocks, as well as help Ecuador on its difﬁcult road to economic recovery and
sustainable levels of debt service. Similarly, we will continue to play an active role with
our regional partners in facilitating timely responses to, and recovery from natural
disasters, such as Hurricane Mitch in Honduras and Nicaragua, Hurricane Keith in Belize,
and the adverse economic disruptions throughout the region resulting from El Nino.

Helping countries in the hemisphere to translate economic growth into social progress is
critical for promoting sustainable growth and sustaining democracy. Despite recent
progress, Latin American and Caribbean countries have the greatest income disparities
of any region -- with the poorest 20% of individuals receiving just 4.5% of the total income
within the region. We will continue to support investments in human development,
particularly the provision of stronger and more efficient basic education and health
services. Between the United States and Mexico there has been signiﬁcant growth in
educational programs emphasizing literacy, bilingual education and exchanges between
classroom teachers, cultural institutions and artists. In the area of health, we are creating
the Border Health Commission to study the epidemiology of the border area in order to
battle diseases.

We also view it as essential that economic prosperity in our hemisphere be pursued in an
environmentally sustainable manner. From our shared seas and freshwater resources to
migratory bird species and transboundary air pollution, the environmental policies of our
neighbors can have a direct impact on quality of life at home. Working with Mexico, we
have taken concerted action to monitor air quality, intensify research on environmental
health issues, follow the cross-border movement of toxic wastes or illegal migrants,
coordinate activities that will benefit nature preserves, and use debt relief to further
protect tropical forests. United States Government assistance to the region recognizes
the vital link between sustainable use of natural resources and long-term prosperity, a
key to developing prosperous trading partners in this hemisphere.

Promoting Democracy and Human Rights

Latin American nations have made notable advances over the last several years, with the
restoration of democratic institutions in old democracies like Chile and Uruguay, the
consolidation of democratic practices in countries like Nicaragua and Guatemala, and the
move to a competitive democratic system in Mexico where the freest and most
transparent presidential and general elections in the country's history were held in July
2000. Of particular signiﬁcance has been the growing hemispheric consensus on the
importance of defending democracy when threatened. Through the OAS, the nations of
the Hemisphere have stood firm in support of constitutionally-elected governments under
stress, as in the cases of Ecuador, Guatemala, Paraguay, Haiti, and the Dominican
Republic. In Peru, the OAS is playing a critical role in facilitating democratic reforms that
are expected to lead to free and fair elections in April 2001. We are committed to working
with our partners in the region to further consolidate democratic governance and guard
against democratic reversals.

But our ability to sustain the hemispheric agenda crafted through the Summit of the
Americas process and the OAS depends in part on meeting the challenges posed by
weak democratic institutions, persistently high unemployment and crime rates, and
serious income disparities. In some Latin American countries, citizens will not fully realize
the benefits of political liberalization and economic growth without regulatory, judicial, law
enforcement, and educational reforms, as well as increased efforts to integrate all
members of society into the formal economy.

The hemisphere's leaders are committed to strengthening democracy, justice, and
human rights. They have pledged to intensify efforts to promote democratic reforms at
the regional and local level, protect the rights of migrant workers and their families,
improve the capabilities and competence of civil and criminal justice systems, and
encourage a strong and active civil society. Speciﬁc initiatives have included: ratiﬁcation
of the Inter-American Convention Against Corruption to strengthen the integrity of
governmental institutions; creation of a Special Rapporteur for Freedom of Expression as
part of the Inter-American Commission for Human Rights; and establishment of an Inter-
American Justice Studies Center to facilitate training personnel and exchanging
information, and other forms of technical cooperation to improve judicial systems.

Education is at the centerpiece of reforms aimed at making democracy work for all the
people of the Americas. The Summit Action Plan adopted at Santiago in 1998 seeks to
ensure by the year 2010 primary education for 100% of children and access to quality
secondary education for at least 75% of young people.

We are also seeking to strengthen norms for defense establishments that are supportive
of democracy, transparency, respect for human rights, and civilian control in defense
matters. Through continued engagement with regional security forces and civilian
personnel, facilitated by establishment of the Center for Hemispheric Defense Studies,
our own modest military activities, and presence in the region, we are helping to increase
civilian expertise in defense affairs and reinforce the positive trend in civilian control.

The United States supports the full implementation ofenduring political, economic,
security, and judicial reforms in Haiti. Recognizing the severe challenges that confront the
Haitian people, we will continue to provide humanitarian assistance directly to those in
need through non-governmental organizations, while working with civil society and
Haitian authorities to encourage development of sustainable democratic institutions. In
cooperation with the OAS and international ﬁnancial institutions, we will maintain
pressure on the Haitian regime to adopt credible, free, and fair electoral processes and to

privatize state-owned industries as an incentive to foreign investment. Concerned by the
continued use of Haiti as a transshipment point for illegal drugs entering the United
States, we support the further development of the counterdrug capabilities by the Haitian
National Police as well as modernization and reform ofjudicial institutions.

The United States remains committed to promoting a peaceful transition to democracy in
Cuba and forestalling a mass exodus that would endanger the lives of migrants and the
security of our borders. While maintaining pressure on the regime to make political and
economic reforms, we continue to encourage the emergence of a civil society to assist
the transition to democracy when the change comes. As the Cuban people feel greater
incentives to take charge of their own future, they are more likely to stay at home and
build the informal and formal structures that will make transition easier. Meanwhile, we
remain ﬁrmly committed to bilateral migration accords that ensure migration in a safe,
legal, and orderly manner.

The Middle East, North Africa,
Southwest, and South Asia

Enhancing Security

The United States has enduring interests in pursuing a just, lasting and comprehensive
Middle East peace, ensuring the security and well-being of Israel, helping our Arab
partners provide for their security, and maintaining worldwide access to a critical energy
source. Our strategy reflects those interests and the unique characteristics of the region
as we work to strengthen peace and stability.

The Middle East Peace Process

A historic transformation has taken place in the political landscape of the Middle East
over the last ﬁve years. Peace agreements have been reached requiring concerted
implementation efforts, and new agreements are possible which hold out the hope of
ending the conﬁict between Israel and its Arab neighbors. The United States -- a key
sponsor of the peace process -- has a clear national interest in seeing the process
deepen and widen. We will continue our steady, determined leadership; standing with
those who take risks for peace, standing against those who would destroy it, lending our
good offices where we can make a difference, and helping bring the concrete beneﬁts of
peace to people's daily lives.

Before the death of Syrian President Assad, Israel and Syria had narrowed their
differences to a remarkable degree. Key differences remained, but the broad features of
an agreement -- and many of its details -- were well established. The United States
remains determined to continue to assist the two sides to ﬁnd a way to overcome their
final differences and hopeful that we will be able to do so. We also continue to believe
that progress in Israeli-Syrian negotiations will allow progress on negotiations between
Israel and Lebanon, and we will continue to press forward toward that goal.

On the Palestinian front, Israelis and Palestinians are confronting core issues that have
deﬁned their conﬁict for the past ﬁfty years, seeking to build a lasting peace based on
partnership and cooperation. Although the July 2000 summit at Camp David failed to
achieve a permanent status agreement and violence has recently erupted in the West
Bank and Gaza, the United States will continue its efforts to assist both sides in their

search for a lasting and just peace. Our goal remains the normalization of relations
between Israel and all Arab states. Through the multilateral working groups on security,
refugees, water, and the environment, we are seeking to promote regional cooperation to
address transboundary environmental issues that affect all parties.

North Africa

The United States has an interest in the stability and prosperity of North Africa, a region
that is undergoing important changes. In particular, we are seeking to strengthen our
relations with Morocco, Tunisia, and Algeria, and to encourage democratic development
and economic reform. Libya continues to be a country of concern for the national security
and foreign policy interests of the United States. Although the government of Libya has
taken an important positive step away from its support of terrorism by surrendering the
Lockerbie suspects, our policy toward Libya is designed to encourage Libya to
completely cease its support of terrorism and to block its efforts to obtain weapons of
mass destruction.

Southwest Asia

In Southwest Asia, the United States remains focused on deterring threats to regional
stability and energy security, countering threats posed by WMD, and protecting the
security of our regional partners, particularly from the threats posed by Iraq and Iran. We
will continue to encourage members of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) to work
closely on collective defense and security arrangements, help individual GCC states
meet their defense requirements, and maintain our bilateral defense relationships. For
example, the United States is fostering counterproliferation cooperation with, and among,
the GCC states through the Cooperative Defense Initiative.

We will maintain an appropriate military presence in Southwest Asia using a combination
of ground, air, and naval forces. The terrorist attack on the USS Cole has not deterred
our resolve to maintain a continuous military presence in the Gulf to enhance regional
stability and defend against threats to friendly countries. Our forces in the Gulf are
backed by our ability to rapidly reinforce the region in time of crisis, which we have
demonstrated convincingly. We remain committed to the UN Security Council resolutions
and preventing the Iraqi regime from taking large-scale military action against Kuwait or
the Kurd and Shia minorities in Iraq.

Our policy toward Iraq is comprised of three central elements: containment to prevent
Saddam from again threatening the stability of the vital Gulf region; relief for the Iraqi
people via the UN oil-for-food program; and support to those Iraqis seeking to replace
Saddam's regime with a government that can live at peace with its neighbors and its
people.

Containment of Iraq remains the foundation of our policy toward Saddam Hussein's
regime. Until his government can be removed from power, it must be prevented from
again threatening the region. In December 1999, the United Nations Security Council
passed UNSCR 1284, a new omnibus resolution on Iraq. The United States supports
Resolution 1284 because it buttresses the containment of Iraq while maximizing relief for
the Iraqi people. The resolution expands the humanitarian aspects of the oil-for-food
program to ensure the well being of the Iraqi people. It provides for a robust new
inspection and monitoring regime that would finish the work begun by UNSCOM. It would
allow for a suspension of the economic sanctions in return for full Iraqi cooperation with
UN arms inspections and Iraqi fulfillment of key disarmament tasks. This resolution would

also lock in the Security Council's control over Iraqi finances to ensure that Saddam
Hussein is never again able to disburse Iraq's resources as he would like.

Although Iraq continues to refuse to implement any of the requirements of Resolution
1284, the United States and other members of the Security Council have already begun
to implement those sections of the resolution intended to improve the humanitarian
situation of the Iraqi populace. Iraqi oil exports have increased dramatically, making
possible the procurement of ever-larger quantities of humanitarian necessities. In
addition, the Security Council has greatly expanded the lists of items that Iraq is allowed
to import to include educational supplies, building materials, spare parts for the oil
industry, infrastructure necessities, and other economic goods.

Nevertheless, we consistently maintain that sanctions on Iraq can only be lifted after it
has met its obligations to the international community in full. Saddam's actions over the
past decade lead us to conclude that his regime will never comply with the obligations
contained in the relevant UN Security Council resolutions. For this reason, we actively
support those who seek to bring a new democratic government to power in Baghdad. We
recognize that this may be a slow and difficult process, but we believe it is the only
solution to the problem of Saddam's regime.

Our policy toward Iran is aimed at changing the practices of the Iranian government in
several key areas, including its efforts to obtain WMD and long-range missiles, its support
for terrorism and groups that violently oppose the Middle East peace process, and its
human rights practices. We view signs of change in Iranian policies with great interest,
both with regard to the possibility of Iran assuming its rightful place in the world
community and the chance for better bilateral ties. We welcome statements by some
Iranian officials that advocate improved relations with the United States.

These positive signs must be balanced against the reality that Iran's support for terrorism
has not yet ceased and serious violations of human rights persist. Iran is continuing its
efforts to acquire WMD and develop long range missiles (including the 1,300 kilometer-
range Shahab-3 it flight-tested in July 1998, July 2000, and again in September 2000).
The United States will continue to oppose Iranian efforts to sponsor terrorism and to
oppose transfers from any country to Iran of materials and technologies that could be
used to develop long-range missiles or WMD. Additionally, the United States will continue
to work with Arab allies threatened by WMD to develop a defense through efforts such as
the Cooperative Defense Initiative.

The United States has demonstrated that we are ready to explore ways to build mutual
confidence and avoid misunderstandings with Iran. In recognition of the positive changes
in Iran, in particular the fair and free parliamentary elections of February 2000, we
modified our sanctions to allow Iran to export to the United States carpets and foodstuffs
-- key exports for small Iranian businesses and to facilitate people to people contact. We
would welcome reciprocal steps from Iran, and continue to signal our willingness to
engage in an authoritative government-to-government dialogue in which both sides will
be able to discuss their issues of concern.

Meanwhile, we will strengthen our cooperation with allies and friends to encourage
further positive changes in Iranian practices that threaten our shared interests. If a
government-to-government dialogue can be initiated and sustained in a way that
addresses the concerns of both sides, then the United States would be willing to develop
with the Islamic Republic a road map leading to normal relations. It could be useful to
begin a dialogue without preconditions.

South Asia

The President's trip to South Asia in March 2000 reﬁected the growing importance of the
region to U.S. political, economic, and commercial interests. As the President
emphasized, our strategy for South Asia is designed to help the peoples of that region by
helping resolve long-standing conflicts, encouraging economic development, and
assisting social development. Regional stability and improved bilateral ties are also
important for U.S. economic interests in a region that contains one-ﬁfth of the world's
population and one of its most important emerging markets. In addition, we seek to work
closely with regional countries to stem the flow of illegal drugs from South Asia, most
notably from Afghanistan.

The President stressed the importance we place on reconciliation between India and

Pakistan and our encouragement of direct dialogue between them to resolve all their

outstanding problems. He urged also that they respect the Line of Control in Kashmir,
reject violence as a means to settle their dispute, and exercise mutual restraint.

We seek to establish relationships with India and Pakistan that are deﬁned in terms of
their own individual merits and reﬁect the full range of U.S. strategic, political and
economic interests in each country. After the President's visit to India, we are working to
enhance our relationship with India at all levels. We look forward to more frequent high-
level contacts including meetings between our heads of government and our cabinet
officials. V\ﬁth Pakistan, a long-standing friend with which we seek improved relations, we
are constrained by the lack of a democratic government since the October 1999 military
coup. We have urged Pakistan's leaders to quickly restore civilian rule and the
democratic process. The President's visit to Islamabad signiﬁed our intent to stay
engaged with Pakistan and work to promote that return to democracy.

We seek, as part of our dialogue with India and Pakistan, to encourage both countries to
take steps to prevent further proliferation, reduce the risk of conflict, and exercise
restraint in their nuclear and missile programs. The United States does not believe that
nuclear weapons have made India or Pakistan more secure. We hope they will abandon
their nuclear weapons programs and join the NPT as non-nuclear weapon states. Indian
and Pakistani nuclear and long-range missile tests have been dangerously destabilizing
and threaten to spark a dangerous arms race in South Asia. Such a race will further
undermine the global nonproliferation regime and thus threaten international security.

In concert with the other permanent members of the UN Security Council, the G-8
nations, and many others in the international community, the United States has called on
India and Pakistan to take a number of steps that would bring them closer to the
international mainstream on nonproliferation. These include: signing and ratifying the
Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, joining the clear international consensus in
support of a cutoff of fissile material production, strengthening export controls, and
refraining from an arms race in nuclear weapons and long-range missiles. We have also
urged them to resume their direct dialogue and take decisive steps to reduce tensions in
South Asia. In that regard, we have urged India and Pakistan to agree to a multilateral
moratorium on the production of ﬁssile material, pending the conclusion of a Fissile
Materials Cutoff Treaty (FIVICT).

Afghanistan remains a serious threat to U.S. worldwide interests because of the Taliban's
continued sheltering of international terrorists and its increasing export of illicit drugs.
Afghanistan remains the primary safehaven for terrorists threatening the United States,
including Usama bin Ladin. The United Nations and the United States have levied
sanctions against the Taliban for harboring Usama bin Ladin and other terrorists, and will

continue to pressure the Taliban until it complies with international requests to bring bin
Ladin to justice. The United States remains concerned about those countries, including
Pakistan, that support the Taliban and allow it to continue to harbor such radical
elements. We are engaged in energetic diplomatic efforts, including through the United
Nations and with Russia and other concerned countries, to address these concerns on an
urgent basis.

Promoting Prosperity

The United States has two principal economic objectives in the region: to promote
regional economic cooperation and development, and to ensure an unrestricted flow of oil
from the region. We seek to promote regional trade and cooperation on infrastructure
through the peace process and our Qualifying Industrial Zone program, which provides
economic benefits for certain countries that enter into business arrangements with Israel.
In South Asia, we will continue to work with the region's countries in their efforts to
implement market reforms, strengthen educational systems, and end the use of child and
sweatshop labor.

Although the United States imports less than 15% of the oil exported from the Persian
Gulf, the region will remain of vital strategic importance to U.S. national security due to
the global nature of the international oil market. Previous oil shocks and the Gulf War
underscore that any blockage of Gulf supplies or sudden changes in price would
immediately affect the international market, driving up energy costs everywhere --
ultimately harming the U.S. economy as well as the economies of our key economic
partners in Europe and Asia. Appropriate responses to events such as Iraq's invasion of
Kuwait can limit the magnitude of a crisis in the Gulf and its impact on world oil markets.
Over the longer term, U.S. dependence on access to these and other foreign oil sources
will remain important as our reserves are depleted. That is one of many important
reasons why the United States must continue to demonstrate commitment and resolve in
the Persian Gulf. We will continue our regular dialogue with the oil-producing nations to
ensure a safe supply of oil and stable prices.

Promoting Democracy and Human Rights

We encourage the spread of democratic values throughout the Middle East, North Africa
and Southwest and South Asia and will pursue this objective aided by constructive
dialogue with countries in the region. In Iran, for example, we hope the nation's leaders
will carry out the people's mandate for a government that respects and protects the rule
of law, both in its internal and external affairs. In Pakistan, we have pressed the new
military rulers to provide a detailed roadmap with a timetable for a return to elected
civilian government. In India, during the President's visit, we supported the establishment
of an Asian Center for Democratic Governance, which would seek to promote the forms
and substance of democracy throughout Asia. We will promote responsible indigenous
moves toward increasing political participation and enhancing the quality of governance,
and we will continue to challenge governments in the region to improve their human
rights records. We will work with the governments and human rights organizations of the
region to promote tolerance for the diverse religious groups present in the Middle East
and South Asia. In particular, we have sought to encourage and end to violence against
minority religious groups, and a repeal of "blasphemy laws'' which are used to
discriminate against minorities.

Respect for human rights also requires rejection of terrorism. If the nations in the region
are to safeguard their own citizens from the threat of terror, they cannot tolerate acts of

indiscriminate violence against civilians, nor can they offer refuge to those who commit
such acts. We will continue to enforce UNSC sanctions against the Taliban for harboring
terrorists such as Usama bin Ladin and look for other ways to pressure the Taliban to end
its support for such groups.

Our policies are guided by our profound respect for Islam. The Muslim religion is the
fastest-growing faith in the United States. We recognize and honor Islam's role as a
source of inspiration, instruction, and moral guidance for hundreds of millions of people
around the world. United States policy in the region is directed at the actions of
governments and terrorist groups, not peoples or faiths.

Sub-Saharan Africa

In recent years, the United States has engaged in a concerted effort to transform our
relationship with Africa. We have supported efforts by many African nations to move
toward multi-party democracy, hold free and fair elections, promote human rights, allow
freedom of the press and association, enhance civil and judicial institutions, and reform
their economies. A new, post-Cold War political order is emerging in Africa, with
emphasis on democratic and pragmatic approaches to solving political, economic, and
environmental problems, and developing human and natural resources. United States-
Africa ties are deepening, and U.S.-Africa trade is expanding.

Sustaining these recent successes will require that we identify those issues that most
directly affect our interests. We will promote regional stability through engagement with
sub-regional organizations and key African states using carefully harmonized U.S.
programs and initiatives. We recognize and are sensitive to the challenges many African
states face as they move toward multi-party democracy and civil-military relations, and
we will work to focus our limited resources on assisting their transition. Our immediate
objective is to increase the number of capable states in Africa, that is, nations that are
able to deﬁne the challenges they face, manage their resources to effectively address
those challenges, and build stability and peace within their borders and their sub-regions.

Enhancing Security

Serious transnational security threats emanate from pockets of Africa, including state-
sponsored terrorism, drug trafficking and other international crime, environmental
degradation, and infectious diseases, especially HIV/AIDS. Since these threats transcend
state borders, they are best addressed through effective, sustained sub-regional
engagement in Africa. We have already made some progress in countering some of
these threats -- such as by investing in efforts to combat environmental degradation and
infectious disease, and leading international efforts to remove mines planted in previous
conflict areas and halt the proliferation of land mines. We continue efforts to reduce the
flow of illegal drugs through Africa and to curtail international organized criminal activity
based in Africa. We will improve international intelligence sharing, and train and assist
African law enforcement, intelligence, and border control agencies to detect and prevent
planned terrorist attacks against U.S. targets in Africa.

We seek to keep Africa free of weapons of mass destruction by supporting South Africa's
nuclear disarmament and accession to the NPT as a non-nuclear weapon state,
supporting the African Nuclear Weapons Free Zone, and encouraging African nations to
join the BWC and CWC.

Nigeria's rapid change from an autocratic, military regime to a civilian, democratically
elected government has afforded us the opportunity to build a promising security, political
and economic relationship with the most populous country in Africa. V\ﬁth nearly one in
six Africans living in Nigeria, the impact of serious cooperative efforts to tackle significant
drug trafficking, corruption, and other crime could be enormously beneﬁcial to the United
States and a large proportion of Africans. In Sierra Leone, we are working with West
Africa -- particularly Nigeria -- the United Kingdom, and the UN to prevent the spread of
conflict, promote accountability, and deal with the role of diamonds in financing the
rebels. We are also seeking to establish the control of a democratically elected
government over the national territory. Additionally, we are addressing the role of
diamonds and the proliferation of small arms in fueling conﬁicts in Angola, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and elsewhere. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Angola, where ﬁghting threatens to destabilize a broad swath of central and southern
Africa, we are working closely with the region and the UN to support the Lusaka peace
process. Similarly, we have provided significant political support to the Arusha Peace
Process to bring a resolution to the ongoing conflict in Burundi. We have also been
working closely with the UN and Organization for African Unity (OAU) to attempt to
establish a lasting peace between Ethiopia and Eritrea.

Sudan continues to pose a threat to regional stability and the national security interests of
the United States. We have moved to counter Sudan's support for international terrorism
and regional destabilization by maintaining the sanctions imposed against the Khartoum
regime until it takes concrete, verifiable steps to end support for terrorism on Sudanese
soil; we continue to press for the regime's isolation through the UN Security Council. We
support regional efforts for a just and fair peace and national reconciliation in Sudan
based on the Inter-Governmental Authority on Development's Declaration of Principles.

Persistent conflict and continuing political instability in some African countries remain
obstacles to Africa's development and to our national security, political and economic
interests there, including assured access to oil reserves and other important natural
resources. To foster regional stability and peace in Africa, the United States in 1996
launched the African Crisis Response Initiative (ACRI) to train African militaries to
conduct effective peacekeeping and humanitarian operations. It will focus on developing
a sustainable regional capacity to address the multiple challenges to peace and security
on the continent. We are consulting closely on expanded ACRI activity with the UN
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, the OAU and its Crisis Management Center,
and African sub-regional organizations already pursuing similar capability enhancements.
A different effort, Operation Focus Relief, is training and equipping seven West African
battalions for peace enforcement missions in Sierra Leone. And finally, another initiative,
the Enhanced International Peacekeeping Capabilities (EIPC) program, provides funding
to upgrade peacekeeping and training centers, and "train the trainer‘ in countries around
the world in order to make them more interoperable with U.S. and other peacekeeping
forces, thereby sharing the burden.

The United States has established the Africa Center for Strategic Studies (ACSS) to
promote the exchange of ideas and information tailored specifically for African security
concerns. The goal is for ACSS to be a source of academic, yet practical, instruction in
promoting civil-military relations and the skills necessary to make effective national
security decisions in democratic governments. The curriculum will engage African military
and civilian defense leaders in a substantive dialogue about defense policy planning,
civil-military relations, and defense resource management in democracies. Our long-term
goal is to support the development of regional security arrangements and institutions to
prevent and manage armed conflicts and curtail transnational threats to our collective
security.

Promoting Prosperity

A stable, democratic, prosperous Africa will be a better economic partner, a better partner
for security and peace, and a better partner in the fights against drug trafﬁcking, crime,
terrorism, infectious diseases, and environmental degradation. Lasting prosperity for
Africa will be possible only when Africa is fully integrated into the global economy.

Further integrating Africa into the global economy will also directly serve U.S. interests by
continuing to expand an already important new market for U.S. exports. The
approximately 700 million people of sub-Saharan Africa represent one of the world's
largest basically untapped markets. Although the United States enjoys only a 7% market
share in Africa, already 100,000 American jobs depend on our exports there. Increasing
both the U.S. market share and the size of the African market will bring tangible beneﬁts
to U.S. workers and increase prosperity and economic opportunity in Africa. Our aim,
therefore, is to assist African nations to implement economic reforms, improve public
governance and combat corruption, create favorable climates for trade and investment,
and achieve sustainable development.

To support the economic transformation underway in Africa, the President in June 1997
launched the Partnership for Economic Growth and Opportunity in Africa Initiative. The
Administration has implemented many of the |nitiative's objectives and continues to work
closely with Congress to implement remaining key elements of this initiative. The
enactment of the African Growth and Opportunity Act on May 18, 2000 marked the
beginning of a new relationship between the United States and sub-Saharan Africa. This
legislation provides the opportunity for substantial preferential market access to the U.S.
market for eligible sub-Saharan African countries, and provides an economic, human
rights, and civil-judicial benchmark towards which current non-eligible countries can
aspire and focus their development efforts.

By signiﬁcantly broadening market access, spurring growth, and helping the poorest
nations eliminate or reduce their bilateral debt, the Initiative and the legislation better
enable us to help African nations undertake difficult economic reforms and build better
lives for their people through sustainable development. We are working with African
governments on shared interests in the world trading system, such as developing
electronic commerce, improving V\lTO capacity-building functions, and eliminating
agricultural export subsidies. We also are pursuing initiatives to encourage U.S. trade
with and investment in Africa, including targeted technical assistance, enhanced debt
forgiveness, and increased bilateral trade ties.

To further our trade objectives in Africa, the Ron Brown Commercial Center was
established in Johannesburg, South Africa in 1998. The Center provides support for
American companies looking to enter or expand into the sub-Saharan African market,
promotes U.S. exports through a range of support programs, and facilitates business
contacts and partnerships between African and American businesses. The President's
historic March 1998 trip to Africa and the unprecedented March 1999 U.S.-Africa
Ministerial further solidified our partnership with African nations across a range of
security, economic, and political issues.

Helping Africans generate the food and income necessary to feed themselves is critical
for promoting sustainable growth and development. Despite some recent progress, the
percentage of malnourished people and lack of diversified sustainable agricultural
production in Africa is the highest of any region in the world, and more help is greatly
needed. In 1998 we launched the Africa Food Security Initiative (AFSI), a USAID-led
effort to help improve agricultural productivity, support research, expand income-

generating projects, and address nutritional needs for the rural poor. While maintaining its
program focus in the original AFSI countries -- Ethiopia, Mali, Mozambique, Malawi, and
Uganda -- the initiative is now being expanded into countries where food security is
declining, such as Tanzania and Zambia, as well as Ghana and Kenya, where we can
build on other USAID programs to accelerate our goals of improved child nutrition and
increased agricultural incomes.

The initial focus under the AFSI involved countries that were either on the fast growth
track or countries that had undertaken a degree of structural adjustment that would put
them on the right path. Ethiopia, Mali, Mozambique, Malawi, and Uganda, the initial focus
countries, have performed reasonably well under the circumstances. Productivity and
agriculture incomes had been rising before the floods in southern Africa or the drought in
East Africa. All of these countries either met or exceeded their performance targets last
year. Food grants production per capita, one of the |nitiative's objectives, has continued
its upward trend last year. Of these countries, all except Ethiopia -- whose war with
Eritrea has continued during this period -- are showing improving food security trends.

However, the picture is less encouraging in much of Africa. Malnutrition accounts for
about one-third of all children's deaths in Africa. And although there has been a decline in
the percentage of preschoolers in Africa who are stunted, the number is going up -- the
only place in the world where this is the case -- from about 35 million in 1980 to a
projection of 50 million in 2005.

The Africa Food Security Initiative, while maintaining its program focus in the original
AFSI countries, is expanding its program into countries where food security is declining,
such as Tanzania and Zambia, as well as Ghana and Kenya, where we can build on
USAID program to accelerate our goals of improved child nutrition and increased
agriculture incomes.

USAID has been able to make progress on the Initiative by focusing on working with
governments to improve agricultural policies, working with farmers and researchers to
increase the technologies that allow for yield increases (or cut production costs), and
working with farmer groups to improve their ability to market their produce more
competitively. We are also working closely with African partners to make available usable
technologies such as air traffic control systems and other airfield improvements, as well
as introducing the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers to provide training and demonstration
projects.

African nations are also engaged in battle with age-old diseases, such as malaria and
tuberculosis (TB), which sap economic productivity and development. Worse, the
epidemic of HIV/AIDS is devastating the continent, reversing hard-fought gains in
development, dramatically reducing life expectancy, decreasing GDPs, and threatening
security and stability in the hardest-hit nations. The Administration has made the battle
against AIDS and other diseases a priority for international action and investment in
Africa. Over the past two years, the President has doubled bilateral assistance for the
fight against HIV/AIDS, launched the Millennium Vaccine Initiative to accelerate the
search for vaccines against HIV/AIDS, malaria, and TB, and launched a campaign to
mobilize new resources from other donors, such as the G-8, and the private sector. We
have also begun the Leadership in Fighting an Epidemic (LIFE) initiative, a $100 million
effort with legislative backing, which focuses on training and prevention activities for
selected sub-Saharan African militaries.

Promoting Democracy and Human Rights

In Africa as elsewhere, democracies have proved to be stronger partners for peace,
stability and sustained prosperity. We will continue to support the important progress
African nations have achieved and to broaden the growing circle of African democracies.

The restoration of civilian democratic government in Nigeria can help return that country
to its place as a leader in Africa. The government and people of Nigeria have succeeded
in restoring democratic civilian government, freed political prisoners, lifted onerous
restrictions on labor unions, and worked to restore the authority of the judicial system.
Nigeria's new civilian government has taken sweeping steps to ensure that the military
remains in the barracks and that fighting corruption will be a top priority. The peaceful
elections in February 1999 and inauguration of the new civilian government in May 1999
were important steps in this transformation.

As in any democratic transition, Nigeria's new government is facing enormous
challenges: creating accountable government, building support within the military for
civilian rule, protecting human rights, and rebuilding the economy so it beneﬁts all
citizens. President Clinton met with President Obasanjo at the White House in October
1999 and again in Nigeria in August 2000. The discussions reaffirmed our nation's
commitment to work with him on the security, economic, political, and social challenges
faced by Nigeria. Kenya, which has played a critical role in maintaining regional stability,
is also facing an historic transition. President Daniel Moi has announced that he will step
down in 2002, after tvi/enty-four years in power. He leaves a country that is suffering from
a weak economy and deteriorating social infrastructure. We must continue to actively
engage the Government of Kenya on such matters as conﬁict resolution, regional
stability, and economic development as well as encouraging commitment to constitutional
reform and human rights.

Democracy assistance has proven to be an effective tool in both Senegal and Zimbabwe.
In Senegal, President Abdou Diouf accepted defeat in the March elections and turned
power over peacefully to Abdoulaye Wade, the opposition leader. The most recent
elections had a record high voter turnout of educated voters despite several complicating
factors. In order to help post-apartheid South Africa achieve its economic, political,
democratic, and security goals for all its citizens, we will continue to provide substantial
bilateral assistance, vigorously promote U.S. trade and investment, and pursue close
cooperation and support for our mutual interests.

Ultimately, the prosperity and security of Africa depend on African leadership, strong
national institutions, and extensive political and economic reform. The United States will
continue to support and promote such national reforms and the evolution of regional
arrangements that build cooperation among African states.

IV. Conclusions

Over the last eight years, we have once again mustered the creative energies of our
Nation to reestablish the United States‘ military and economic strength within the world
community. This leadership position has been achieved in a manner in which our
forefathers would likely have been pleased; a nation leading by the authority that comes
from the attractiveness of its values and force of its example, rather than the power of its
military might to compel by force or sanction. As a result, the world now looks to the
United States to be notjust a broker of peace, but a catalyst of coalitions, and a
guarantor of global financial stability. It has been achieved in spite of a period of
tumultuous change in the strategic landscape. Yet, it has been realized because we have
maintained a steadfast focus on simple goals -- peace, shared prosperity, and freedom --
that lift the condition of all nations and people that choose to join us.

Our strategy for engagement is comprised of many different policies, the key elements of
which include:

- Adapting our alliances
- Encouraging the reorientation of other states, including former adversaries

- Encouraging democratization, open markets, free trade, and sustainable
development

- Preventing conﬁict

- Countering potential regional aggressors

- Confronting new threats

- Steering international peace and stability operations.

These elements are building blocks within a strategic architecture that describe a foreign
policy for a global age. They are not easily summed up in a single phrase but they have
all been guided by two simple principles -- protecting our interests and advancing our
values. Together, the sum of these goals, elements, and principles represent the
blueprint for our strategy of engagement, and we believe that strategy will best achieve
our vision for the future.

But we must not be too sanguine about the future. New challenges to the sustainability of
our current economic, political, and national security successes will arise. The true
question is what will best ensure our leadership in the years ahead. It took great vision
almost a decade ago to realize that strength abroad would depend not only on
maintaining an internationalist philosophy but also on reestablishing strength at home.
Putting our economic house in order, while not retreating into isolationism proved a wise
course and validated the mutual linkage between disparate goals of peace, shared
prosperity, and democracy. Any other policy choice might well have permitted the world
to fall into a series of regional conflicts in the aftermath of the Cold War and possibly
have precluded opportunity for the U.S. economic recovery of the 1990s. Although past is
not necessarily prologue, the inexorable trend of globalization supports the continued
viability of a strategy of engagement. We must not, in reaction to the real or perceived

costs of engagement, retreat into a policy of "Fortress America." To do so would lead us
down a path that would dishonor our commitments, ignore our friends, and discount belief
in our values. The result would be a global loss of our authority and with it ultimately our
power. A strategy of engagement, however, is the surest way to enhance not only our
power but also our authority, and thus our leadership, into the 21st century.

