THE NATIONAL
SECURITY STRATEGY

OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

 

 

MARCH 2006

    

x
Wsxasri‘

THE WHITE HOUSE
WASHINGTON

My fellow Americans,

America is at war. This is a wartime national security strategy required by the grave challenge
we face — the rise of terrorism fueled by an aggressive ideology of hatred and murder, fully
revealed to the American people on September 11, 2001. This strategy reflects our most solemn
obligation: to protect the security of the American people.

America also has an unprecedented opportunity to lay the foundations for future peace. The
ideals that have inspired our history — freedom, democracy, and human dignity - are increasingly
inspiring individuals and nations throughout the world. And because free nations tend toward
peace, the advance of liberty will make America more secure.

These inseparable priorities — ﬁghting and winning the war on terror and promoting freedom as
the alternative to tyranny and despair — have now guided American policy for more than 4 years.

We have kept on the offensive against terrorist networks, leaving our enemy weakened, but not
yet defeated.

We have joined with the Afghan people to bring down the Taliban regime — the protectors of the
al—Qaida network — and aided a new, democratic government to rise in its place.

We have focused the attention of the world on the proliferation of dangerous weapons — although
great challenges in this area remain.

We have stood for the spread of democracy in the broader Middle East — meeting challenges yet
seeing progress few would have predicted or expected.

We have cultivated stable and cooperative relations with all the major powers of the world.

We have dramatically expanded our efforts to encourage economic development and the hope it
brings — and focused these efforts on the promotion of reform and achievement of results.

We led an international coalition to topple the dictator of Iraq, who had brutalized his own
people, terrorized his region, defied the international community, and sought and used weapons
of mass destruction.

And we are fighting alongside Iraqis to secure a united, stable, and democratic Iraq — a new ally
in the war on terror in the heart of the Middle East.

We have seen great accomplishments, confronted new challenges, and reﬁned our approach as
conditions changed. We have also found that the defense of freedom brings us loss and sorrow,
because freedom has determined enemies. We have always known that the war on terror would
require great sacriﬁce — and in this war, we have said farewell to some very good men and
women. The terrorists have used dramatic acts of murder — from the streets of Fallujah to the

subways of London — in an attempt to undermine our will. The struggle against this enemy — an
enemy that targets the innocent without conscience or hesitation — has been difficult. And our
work is far from over.

America now faces a choice between the path of fear and the path of conﬁdence. The path of
fear — isolationism and protectionism, retreat and retrenchment — appeals to those who find our
challenges too great and fail to see our opportunities. Yet history teaches that every time
American leaders have taken this path, the challenges have only increased and the missed
opportunities have left future generations less secure.

This Administration has chosen the path of confidence. We choose leadership over isolationism,
and the pursuit of free and fair trade and open markets over protectionism. We choose to deal
with challenges now rather than leaving them for future generations. We ﬁght our enemies
abroad instead of waiting for them to arrive in our country. We seek to shape the world, not
merely be shaped by it; to inﬂuence events for the better instead of being at their mercy.

The path we have chosen is consistent with the great tradition of American foreign policy. Like
the policies of Harry Truman and Ronald Reagan, our approach is idealistic about our national
goals, and realistic about the means to achieve them.

To follow this path, we must maintain and expand our national strength so we can deal with
threats and challenges before they can damage our people or our interests. We must maintain a
military without peer — yet our strength is not founded on force of arms alone. It also rests on
economic prosperity and a vibrant democracy. And it rests on strong alliances, friendships, and
international institutions, which enable us to promote freedom, prosperity, and peace in common
purpose with others.

Our national security strategy is founded upon two pillars:

The ﬁrst pillar is promoting freedom, justice, and human dignity — working to end tyranny, to
promote effective democracies, and to extend prosperity through free and fair trade and wise
development policies. Free governments are accountable to their people, govern their territory
effectively, and pursue economic and political policies that beneﬁt their citizens. Free
governments do not oppress their people or attack other free nations. Peace and international
stability are most reliably built on a foundation of freedom.

The second pillar of our strategy is confronting the challenges of our time by leading a growing
community of democracies. Many of the problems we face — from the threat of pandemic
disease, to proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, to terrorism, to human trafficking, to
natural disasters — reach across borders. Effective multinational efforts are essential to solve
these problems. Yet history has shown that only when we do our part will others do theirs.
America must continue to lead.

”i.a.

GEOR . BUSH
THE HOUSE
March 16, 2006

III.

IV.

VI.

VII.

VIII.

IX.

XI.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Overview of America’s National Security Strategy ........................................................ .. 1
Champion Aspirations for Human Dignity ...................................................................... .. 2
Strengthen Alliances to Defeat Global Terrorism and Work to Prevent Attacks

Against Us and Our Friends ............................................................................................. .. 8
Work with Other to Defuse Regional Conﬂicts ............................................................. .. 14

Prevent Our Enemies from Threatening Us, Our Allies, and Our Friends with Weapons
of Mass Destruction ....................................................................................................... .. 18

Ignite a New Era of Global Economic Growth through Free Markets and Free Trade... 25

Expand the Circle of Development by Opening Societies and Building the Infrastructure
of Democracy ................................................................................................................. .. 31

Develop Agendas for Cooperative Action with the Other Main Centers of Global
Power ............................................................................................................................. .. 35

Transform America’s National Security Institutions to Meet the Challenges and

Opportunities of the 21“ Century ................................................................................... .. 43
Engage the Opportunities and Confront the Challenges of Globalization ..................... .. 47
Conclusion ..................................................................................................................... .. 49

National Security Strategy

iii

Overview of America’s National Securitv Strategy

It is the policy of the United States to seek and support democratic movements and
institutions in every nation and culture, with the ultimate goal of ending tyranny in our
world. In the world today, the fundamental character of regimes matters as much as the
distribution of power among them. The goal of our statecraft is to help create a world of
democratic, well-governed states that can meet the needs of their citizens and conduct
themselves responsibly in the international system. This is the best way to provide
enduring security for the American people.

Achieving this goal is the work of generations. The United States is in the early years of
a long struggle, similar to what our country faced in the early years of the Cold War. The
20th century witnessed the triumph of freedom over the threats of fascism and
communism. Yet a new totalitarian ideology now threatens, an ideology grounded not in
secular philosophy but in the perversion of a proud religion. Its content may be different
from the ideologies of the last century, but its means are similar: intolerance, murder,
terror, enslavement, and repression.

Like those who came before us, we must lay the foundations and build the institutions
that our country needs to meet the challenges we face. The chapters that follow will
focus on several essential tasks. The United States must:

0 Champion aspirations for human dignity;

0 Strengthen alliances to defeat global terrorism and work to prevent attacks against us
and our friends;

0 Work with others to defuse regional Conﬂicts;

0 Prevent our enemies from threatening us, our allies, and our friends with weapons of
mass destruction (WMD);

0 Ignite a new era of global economic growth through free markets and free trade;

0 Expand the circle of development by opening societies and building the infrastructure
of democracy;

0 Develop agendas for cooperative action with other main centers of global power;

0 Transform America’s national security institutions to meet the challenges and
opportunities of the 21“ century; and

0 Engage the opportunities and confront the challenges of globalization.

National Security Strategy 1

II.

Champion Aspirations for Human Dignity
A. Summary of National Security Strategy 2002

The United States must defend liberty and justice because these principles are right and
true for all people everywhere. These nonnegotiable demands of human dignity are
protected most securely in democracies. The United States Government will work to
advance human dignity in word and deed, speaking out for freedom and against
violations of human rights and allocating appropriate resources to advance these ideals.

B. Successes and Challenges since 2002

Since 2002, the world has seen extraordinary progress in the expansion of freedom,
democracy, and human dignity:

0 The peoples of Afghanistan and Iraq have replaced tyrannies with democracies.

0 In Afghanistan, the tyranny of the Taliban has been replaced by a freely-elected
government; Afghans have written and ratified a constitution guaranteeing rights
and freedoms unprecedented in their history; and an elected legislature gives the
people a regular voice in their government.

0 In Iraq, a tyrant has been toppled; over 8 million Iraqis voted in the nation’s first
free and fair election; a freely negotiated constitution was passed by a referendum
in which almost 10 million Iraqis participated; and, for the first time in their
history, nearly 12 million Iraqis have elected a permanent government under a
popularly determined constitution.

0 The people of Lebanon have rejected the heavy hand of foreign rule. The people of
Egypt have experienced more open but still ﬂawed elections. Saudi Arabia has taken
some preliminary steps to give its citizens more of a voice in their government.
Jordan has made progress in opening its political process. Kuwait and Morocco are
pursuing agendas of political reform.

0 The “color revolutions” in Georgia, Ukraine, and Kyrgyzstan have brought new hope
for freedom across the Eurasian landmass.

0 Democracy has made further advances in Africa, Latin America, and Asia, with
peaceful transfers of power; growth in independent judiciaries and the rule of law;
improved election practices; and expanding political and economic rights.

The human desire for freedom is universal, but the growth of freedom is not inevitable.
Without support from free nations, freedom’s spread could be hampered by the
challenges we face:

2

National Security Strategy

0 Many governments are at fragile stages of political development and need to
consolidate democratic institutions — and leaders that have won democratic elections
need to uphold the principles of democracy;

0 Some governments have regressed, eroding the democratic freedoms their peoples
enjoy;

0 Some governments have not delivered the benefits of effective democracy and
prosperity to their citizens, leaving them susceptible to or taken over by demagogues
peddling an anti-free market authoritarianism;

0 Some regimes seek to separate economic liberty from political liberty, pursuing
prosperity while denying their people basic rights and freedoms; and

0 Tyranny persists in its harshest form in a number of nations.
C. The Way Ahead

The United States has long championed freedom because doing so reﬂects our values and
advances our interests. It reﬂects our values because we believe the desire for freedom
lives in every human heart and the imperative of human dignity transcends all nations and
cultures.

Championing freedom advances our interests because the survival of liberty at home
increasingly depends on the success of liberty abroad. Governments that honor their
citizens’ dignity and desire for freedom tend to uphold responsible conduct toward other
nations, while governments that brutalize their people also threaten the peace and
stability of other nations. Because democracies are the most responsible members of the
international system, promoting democracy is the most effective long-term measure for
strengthening international stability; reducing regional Conﬂicts; countering terrorism and
terror-supporting extremism; and extending peace and prosperity.

To protect our Nation and honor our values, the United States seeks to extend freedom
across the globe by leading an international effort to end tyranny and to promote effective
democracy.

1. Explaining the Goal: Ending Tyranny

Tyranny is the combination of brutality, poverty, instability, corruption, and suffering,
forged under the rule of despots and despotic systems. People living in nations such as
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (DPRK), Iran, Syria, Cuba, Belarus, Burma,
and Zimbabwe know firsthand the meaning of tyranny; it is the bleak reality they endure
every day. And the nations they border know the consequences of tyranny as well, for
the misrule of tyrants at home leads to instability abroad. All tyrannies threaten the
world’s interest in freedom’s expansion, and some tyrannies, in their pursuit of WMD or
sponsorship of terrorism, threaten our immediate security interests as well.

National Security Strategy 3

Tyranny is not inevitable, and recent history reveals the arc of the tyrant’s fate. The 20th
century has been called the “Democracy Century,” as tyrannies fell one by one and
democracies rose in their stead. At mid-century about two dozen of the world’s
governments were democratic; 50 years later this number was over 120. The democratic
revolution has embraced all cultures and all continents.

Though tyranny has few advocates, it needs more adversaries. In today’s world, no
tyrant’s rule can survive without the support or at least the tolerance of other nations. To
end tyranny we must summon the collective outrage of the free world against the
oppression, abuse, and impoverishment that tyrannical regimes inﬂict on their people —
and summon their collective action against the dangers tyrants pose to the security of the
world.

An end to tyranny will not mark an end to all global ills. Disputes, disease, disorder,
poverty, and injustice will outlast tyranny, confronting democracies long after the last
tyrant has fallen. Yet tyranny must not be tolerated — it is a crime of man, not a fact of
nature.

2. Explaining the Goal: Promoting Effective Democracies

As tyrannies give way, we must help newly free nations build effective democracies:
states that are respectful of human dignity, accountable to their citizens, and responsible
towards their neighbors. Effective democracies:

0 Honor and uphold basic human rights, including freedom of religion, conscience,
speech, assembly, association, and press;

0 Are responsive to their citizens, submitting to the will of the people, especially when
people vote to change their government;

0 Exercise effective sovereignty and maintain order within their own borders, protect
independent and impartial systems of justice, punish crime, embrace the rule of law,
and resist corruption; and

0 Limit the reach of government, protecting the institutions of civil society, including
the family, religious communities, voluntary associations, private property,
independent business, and a market economy.

In effective democracies, freedom is indivisible. Political, religious, and economic
liberty advance together and reinforce each other. Some regimes have opened their
economies while trying to restrict political or religious freedoms. This will not work.
Over time, as people gain control over their economic lives, they will insist on more
control over their political and personal lives as well. Yet political progress can be
jeopardized if economic progress does not keep pace. We will harness the tools of
economic assistance, development aid, trade, and good governance to help ensure that
new democracies are not burdened with economic stagnation or endemic corruption.

4

National Security Strategy

Elections are the most visible sign of a free society and can play a critical role in
advancing effective democracy. But elections alone are not enough — they must be
reinforced by other values, rights, and institutions to bring about lasting freedom. Our
goal is human liberty protected by democratic institutions.

Participation in elections by individuals or parties must include their commitment to the
equality of all citizens; minority rights; civil liberties; voluntary and peaceful transfer of
power; and the peaceful resolution of differences. Effective democracy also requires
institutions that can protect individual liberty and ensure that the government is
responsive and accountable to its citizens. There must be an independent media to
inform the public and facilitate the free exchange of ideas. There must be political
associations and political parties that can freely compete. Rule of law must be reinforced
by an independent judiciary, a professional legal establishment, and an honest and
competent police force.

These principles are tested by the victory of Hamas candidates in the recent elections in
the Palestinian territories. The Palestinian people voted in a process that was free, fair,
and inclusive.

The Palestinian people having made their choice at the polls, the burden now shifts to
those whom they have elected to take the steps necessary to advance peace, prosperity,
and statehood for the Palestinian people. Hamas has been designated as a terrorist
organization by the United States and European Union (EU) because it has embraced
terrorism and deliberately killed innocent civilians. The international community has
made clear that there is a fundamental contradiction between armed group and militia
activities and the building of a democratic state. The international community has also
made clear that a two-state solution to the conﬂict requires all participants in the
democratic process to renounce violence and terror, accept Israel’s right to exist, and
disarm as outlined in the Roadmap. These requirements are clear, ﬁrm, and of long
standing. The opportunity for peace and statehood — a consistent goal of this
Administration — is open if Hamas will abandon its terrorist roots and change its
relationship with Israel.

The elected Hamas representatives also have an opportunity and a responsibility to
uphold the principles of democratic government, including protection of minority rights
and basic freedoms and a commitment to a recurring, free, and fair electoral process. By
respecting these principles, the new Palestinian leaders can demonstrate their own
commitment to freedom and help bring a lasting democracy to the Palestinian territories.
But any elected government that refuses to honor these principles cannot be considered
fully democratic, however it may have taken office.

3. How We Will Advance Freedom: Principled in Goals and Pragmatic in Means
We have a responsibility to promote human freedom. Yet freedom cannot be imposed; it

must be chosen. The form that freedom and democracy take in any land will reﬂect the
history, culture, and habits unique to its people.

National Security Strategy 5

The United States will stand with and support advocates of freedom in every land.
Though our principles are consistent, our tactics will vary. They will reﬂect, in part,
where each government is on the path from tyranny to democracy. In some cases, we
will take vocal and visible steps on behalf of immediate change. In other cases, we will
lend more quiet support to lay the foundation for future reforms. As we consider which
approaches to take, we will be guided by what will most effectively advance freedom’s
cause while we balance other interests that are also vital to the security and well-being of
the American people.

In the cause of ending tyranny and promoting effective democracy, we will employ the
full array of political, economic, diplomatic, and other tools at our disposal, including:

0 Speaking out against abuses of human rights;

0 Supporting publicly democratic reformers in repressive nations, including by holding
high-level meetings with them at the White House, Department of State, and U.S.
Embassies;

0 Using foreign assistance to support the development of free and fair elections, rule of
law, civil society, human rights, women’s rights, free media, and religious freedom;

0 Tailoring assistance and training of military forces to support civilian control of the
military and military respect for human rights in a democratic society;

0 Applying sanctions that designed to target those who rule oppressive regimes while
sparing the people;

0 Encouraging other nations not to support oppressive regimes;

0 Partnering with other democratic nations to promote freedom, democracy, and human
rights in specific countries and regions;

0 Strengthening and building new initiatives such as the Broader Middle East and North
Africa Initiative’s Foundation for the Future, the Community of Democracies, and the
United Nations Democracy Fund;

0 Forming creative partnerships with nongovernmental organizations and other civil
society voices to support and reinforce their work;

0 Working with existing international institutions such as the United Nations and
regional organizations such as the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, the African Union (AU), and the Organization of American States (OAS) to
help implement their democratic commitments, and helping establish democracy
charters in regions that lack them;

6 National Security Strategy

0 Supporting condemnation in multilateral institutions of egregious violations of human
rights and freedoms;

0 Encouraging foreign direct investment in and foreign assistance to countries where
there is a commitment to the rule of law, fighting corruption, and democratic
accountability; and

0 Concluding free trade agreements (FTAs) that encourage countries to enhance the
rule of law, fight corruption, and further democratic accountability.

These tools must be used vigorously to protect the freedoms that face particular peril
around the world: religious freedom, women’s rights, and freedom for men, women, and
children caught in the cruel network of human trafficking.

0 Against a terrorist enemy that is deﬁned by religious intolerance, we defend the First
Freedom: the right of people to believe and worship according to the dictates of their
own conscience, free from the coercion of the state, the coercion of the majority, or
the coercion of a minority that wants to dictate what others must believe.

0 No nation can be free if half its population is oppressed and denied fundamental
rights. We affirm the inherent dignity and worth of women, and support vigorously
their full participation in all aspects of society.

0 Trafficking in persons is a form of modern-day slavery, and we strive for its total
abolition. Future generations will not excuse those who turn a blind eye to it.

Our commitment to the promotion of freedom is a commitment to walk alongside
governments and their people as they make the difficult transition to effective
democracies. We will not abandon them before the transition is secure because immature
democracies can be prone to conﬂict and vulnerable to exploitation by terrorists. We will
not let the challenges of democratic transitions frighten us into clinging to the illusory
stability of the authoritarian.

America’s closest alliances and friendships are with countries with whom we share
common values and principles. The more countries demonstrate that they treat their own
citizens with respect and are committed to democratic principles, the closer and stronger
their relationship with America is likely to be.

The United States will lead and calls on other nations to join us in a common
international effort. All free nations have a responsibility to stand together for freedom
because all free nations share an interest in freedom’s advance.

National Security Strategy 7

III.

Strengthen Alliances to Defeat Global Terrorism and Work to Prevent Attacks
Against Us and Our Friends

A. Summary of National Security Strategy 2002

Defeating terrorism requires a long-term strategy and a break with old patterns. We are
fighting a new enemy with global reach. The United States can no longer simply rely on
deterrence to keep the terrorists at bay or defensive measures to thwart them at the last
moment. The fight must be taken to the enemy, to keep them on the run. To succeed in
our own efforts, we need the support and concerted action of friends and allies. We must
join with others to deny the terrorists what they need to survive: safe haven, financial
support, and the support and protection that certain nation-states historically have given
them.

B. Current Context: Successes and Challenges

The war against terror is not over. America is safer, but not yet safe. As the enemy
adjusts to our successes, so too must we adjust. The successes are many:

0 Al-Qaida has lost its safe haven in Afghanistan.

0 A multinational coalition joined by the Iraqis is aggressively prosecuting the war
against the terrorists in Iraq.

0 The al-Qaida network has been significantly degraded. Most of those in the al-Qaida
network responsible for the September 11 attacks, including the plot’s mastermind
Khalid Shaykh Muhammad, have been captured or killed.

0 There is a broad and growing global consensus that the deliberate killing of innocents
is never justified by any calling or cause.

0 Many nations have rallied to fight terrorism, with unprecedented cooperation on law
enforcement, intelligence, military, and diplomatic activity.

0 Numerous countries that were part of the problem before September 11 are now
increasingly becoming part of the solution — and this transformation has occurred
without destabilizing friendly regimes in key regions.

0 The Administration has worked with Congress to adopt and implement key reforms
like the Patriot Act which promote our security while also protecting our fundamental
liberties.

8

National Security Strategy

The enemy is determined, however, and we face some old and new challenges:

0 Terrorist networks today are more dispersed and less centralized. They are more
reliant on smaller cells inspired by a common ideology and less directed by a central
command structure.

0 While the United States Government and its allies have thwarted many attacks, we
have not been able to stop them all. The terrorists have struck in many places,
including Afghanistan, Egypt, Indonesia, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Morocco, Pakistan,
Russia, Saudi Arabia, Spain, and the United Kingdom. And they continue to seek
WMD in order to inﬂict even more catastrophic attacks on us and our friends and
allies.

0 The ongoing fight in Iraq has been twisted by terrorist propaganda as a rallying cry.

0 Some states, such as Syria and Iran, continue to harbor terrorists at home and sponsor
terrorist activity abroad.

C. The Way Ahead

From the beginning, the War on Terror has been both a battle of arms and a battle of
ideas — a fight against the terrorists and against their murderous ideology. In the short
run, the fight involves using military force and other instruments of national power to kill
or capture the terrorists, deny them safe haven or control of any nation; prevent them
from gaining access to WMD; and cut off their sources of support. In the long run,
winning the war on terror means winning the battle of ideas, for it is ideas that can turn
the disenchanted into murderers willing to kill innocent victims.

While the War on Terror is a battle of ideas, it is not a battle of religions. The
transnational terrorists confronting us today exploit the proud religion of Islam to serve a
violent political vision: the establishment, by terrorism and subversion, of a totalitarian
empire that denies all political and religious freedom. These terrorists distort the idea of
jihad into a call for murder against those they regard as apostates or unbelievers —
including Christians, Jews, Hindus, other religious traditions, and all Muslims who
disagree with them. Indeed, most of the terrorist attacks since September 11 have
occurred in Muslim countries — and most of the victims have been Muslims.

To wage this battle of ideas effectively, we must be clear-eyed about what does and does
not give rise to terrorism:

0 Terrorism is not the inevitable by-product of poverty. Many of the September 11
hijackers were from middle-class backgrounds, and many terrorist leaders, like bin
Laden, are from privileged upbringings.

National Security Strategy 9

0 Terrorism is not simply a result of hostility to U.S. policy in Iraq. The United States
was attacked on September 11 and earlier, well before we toppled the Saddam Hussein
regime. Moreover, countries that stayed out of the Iraq war have not been spared from
terror attack.

0 Terrorism is not simply a result of Israeli-Palestinian issues. Al-Qaida plotting for the
September 11 attacks began in the 1990s, during an active period in the peace process.

0 Terrorism is not simply a response to our efforts to prevent terror attacks. The al-
Qaida network targeted the United States long before the United States targeted al-
Qaida. Indeed, the terrorists are emboldened more by perceptions of weakness than by
demonstrations of resolve. Terrorists lure recruits by telling them that we are decadent
and easily intimidated and will retreat if attacked.

The terrorism we confront today springs from:

0 Political alienation. Transnational terrorists are recruited from people who have no
voice in their own government and see no legitimate way to promote change in their
own country. Without a stake in the existing order, they are Vulnerable to
manipulation by those who advocate a perverse vision based on violence and
destruction.

0 Grievances that can be blamed on others. The failures the terrorists feel and see are
blamed on others, and on perceived injustices from the recent or sometimes distant
past. The terrorists’ rhetoric keeps wounds associated with this past fresh and raw, a
potent motivation for revenge and terror.

0 Sub-cultures of conspiracy and misinformation. Terrorists recruit more effectively
from populations whose information about the world is contaminated by falsehoods
and corrupted by conspiracy theories. The distortions keep alive grievances and filter
out facts that would challenge popular prejudices and self-serving propaganda.

0 An ideology that justifies murder. Terrorism ultimately depends upon the appeal of
an ideology that excuses or even glorifies the deliberate killing of innocents. A proud
religion — the religion of Islam — has been twisted and made to serve an evil end, as in
other times and places other religions have been similarly abused.

Defeating terrorism in the long run requires that each of these factors be addressed. The
genius of democracy is that it provides a counter to each.

0 In place of alienation, democracy offers an ownership stake in society, a chance to
shape one’s own future.

0 In place of festering grievances, democracy offers the rule of law, the peaceful
resolution of disputes, and the habits of advancing interests through compromise.

10 National Security Strategy

0 In place of a culture of conspiracy and misinformation, democracy offers freedom of
speech, independent media, and the marketplace of ideas, which can expose and
discredit falsehoods, prejudices, and dishonest propaganda.

0 In place of an ideology that justifies murder, democracy offers a respect for human
dignity that abhors the deliberate targeting of innocent civilians.

Democracy is the opposite of terrorist tyranny, which is why the terrorists denounce it
and are willing to kill the innocent to stop it. Democracy is based on empowerment,
while the terrorists’ ideology is based on enslavement. Democracies expand the freedom
of their citizens, while the terrorists seek to impose a single set of narrow beliefs.
Democracy sees individuals as equal in worth and dignity, having an inherent potential to
create and to govern themselves. The terrorists see individuals as objects to be exploited,
and then to be ruled and oppressed.

Democracies are not immune to terrorism. In some democracies, some ethnic or
religious groups are unable or unwilling to grasp the benefits of freedom otherwise
available in the society. Such groups can evidence the same alienation and despair that
the transnational terrorists exploit in undemocratic states. This accounts for the
emergence in democratic societies of homegrown terrorists such as were responsible for
the bombings in London in July 2005 and for the violence in some other nations. Even in
these cases, the long-term solution remains deepening the reach of democracy so that all
citizens enjoy its benefits.

The strategy to counter the lies behind the terrorists’ ideology is to empower the very
people the terrorists most want to exploit: the faithful followers of Islam. We will
continue to support political reforms that empower peaceful Muslims to practice and
interpret their faith. The most vital work will be done within the Islamic world itself, and
Jordan, Morocco, and Indonesia have begun to make important strides in this effort.
Responsible Islamic leaders need to denounce an ideology that distorts and exploits Islam
for destructive ends and defiles a proud religion.

Many of the Muslim faith are already making this commitment at great personal risk.
They realize they are a target of this ideology of terror. Everywhere we have joined in
the fight against terrorism, Muslim allies have stood beside us, becoming partners in this
vital cause. Pakistan and Saudi Arabia have launched effective efforts to capture or kill
the leadership of the al-Qaida network. Afghan troops are in combat against Taliban
remnants. Iraqi soldiers are sacrificing to defeat al-Qaida in their own country. These
brave citizens know the stakes — the survival of their own liberty, the future of their own
region, the justice and humanity of their own traditions — and the United States is proud
to stand beside them.

The advance of freedom and human dignity through democracy is the long-term solution
to the transnational terrorism of today. To create the space and time for that long-term
solution to take root, there are four steps we will take in the short term.

National Security Strategy 11

o Prevent attacks by terrorist networks before they occur. A government has no higher
obligation than to protect the lives and livelihoods of its citizens. The hard core of the
terrorists cannot be deterred or reformed; they must be tracked down, killed, or captured.
They must be cut off from the network of individuals and institutions on which they
depend for support. That network must in turn be deterred, disrupted, and disabled by
using a broad range of tools.

0 Deny WMD to rogue states and to terrorist allies who would use them without
hesitation. Terrorists have a perverse moral code that glorifies deliberately targeting
innocent civilians. Terrorists try to inﬂict as many casualties as possible and seek WMD
to this end. Denying terrorists WMD will require new tools and new international
approaches. We are working with partner nations to improve security at vulnerable
nuclear sites worldwide and bolster the ability of states to detect, disrupt, and respond to
terrorist activity involving WMD.

o Deny terrorist groups the support and sanctuary of rogue states. The United States
and its allies in the War on Terror make no distinction between those who commit acts of
terror and those who support and harbor them, because they are equally guilty of murder.
Any government that chooses to be an ally of terror, such as Syria or Iran, has chosen to
be an enemy of freedom, justice, and peace. The world must hold those regimes to
account.

0 Deny the terrorists control of any nation that they would use as a base and

launching pad for terror. The terrorists’ goal is to overthrow a rising democracy; claim
a strategic country as a haven for terror; destabilize the Middle East; and strike America
and other free nations with ever-increasing violence. This we can never allow. This is
why success in Afghanistan and Iraq is vital, and why we must prevent terrorists from
exploiting ungoverned areas.

America will lead in this fight, and we will continue to partner with allies and will recruit
new friends to join the battle.

Afghanistan and Iraq: The Front Lines in the War on Terror
Winning the War on Terror requires winning the battles in Afghanistan and Iraq.

In Afghanistan, the successes already won must be consolidated. A few years ago, Afghanistan
was condemned to a pre-modern nightmare. Now it has held two successful free elections and is
a staunch ally in the war on terror. Much work remains, however, and the Afghan people
deserve the support of the United States and the entire international community.

The terrorists today see Iraq as the central front of their fight against the United States. They
want to defeat America in Iraq and force us to abandon our allies before a stable democratic
government has been established that can provide for its own security. The terrorists believe
they would then have proven that the United States is a waning power and an unreliable friend.
In the chaos of a broken Iraq the terrorists believe they would be able to establish a safe haven

12 National Security Strategy

like they had in Afghanistan, only this time in the heart of a geopolitically vital region.
Surrendering to the terrorists would likewise hand them a powerful recruiting tool: the
perception that they are the vanguard of history.

When the Iraqi Government, supported by the Coalition, defeats the terrorists, terrorism will be
dealt a critical blow. We will have broken one of al-Qaida’s most formidable factions — the
network headed by Zarqawi — and denied him the safe haven he seeks in Iraq. And the success
of democracy in Iraq will be a launching pad for freedom’s success throughout a region that for
decades has been a source of instability and stagnation.

The Administration has explained in some detail the strategy for helping the Iraqi people defeat
the terrorists and neutralize the insurgency in Iraq. This requires supporting the Iraqi people in
integrating activity along three broad tracks:

Political: Work with Iraqis to:

0 Isolate hardened enemy elements who are unwilling to accept a peaceful political process;

0 Engage those outside the political process who are willing to turn away from violence and
invite them into that process; and

0 Build stable, pluralistic, and effective national institutions that can protect the interests of all
Iraqis.

Security: Work with Iraqi Security Forces to:

0 Clear areas of enemy control by remaining on the offensive, killing and capturing enemy
ﬁghters, and denying them safe haven;

0 Hold areas freed from enemy control with an adequate Iraqi security force presence that
ensures these areas remain under the control of a peaceful Iraqi Government; and

0 Build Iraqi Security Forces and the capacity of local institutions to deliver services, advance
the rule of law, and nurture civil society.

Economic: Work with the Iraqi Government to:

0 Restore Iraq’s neglected infrastructure so that Iraqis can meet increasing demand and the
needs of a growing economy;

0 Reform Iraq’s economy so that it can be self-sustaining based on market principles; and

0 Build the capacity of Iraqi institutions to maintain their infrastructure, rejoin the international
economic community, and improve the general welfare and prosperity of all Iraqis.

National Security Strategy 13

IV.

Work with Others to Defuse Regional Conflicts
A. Summary of National Security Strategy 2002

Regional Conﬂicts are a bitter legacy from previous decades that continue to affect our
national security interests today. Regional Conﬂicts do not stay isolated for long and
often spread or devolve into humanitarian tragedy or anarchy. Outside parties can exploit
them to further other ends, much as al-Qaida exploited the civil war in Afghanistan. This
means that even if the United States does not have a direct stake in a particular conﬂict,
our interests are likely to be affected over time. Outsiders generally cannot impose
solutions on parties that are not ready to embrace them, but outsiders can sometimes help
create the conditions under which the parties themselves can take effective action.

B. Current Context: Successes and Challenges

The world has seen remarkable progress on a number of the most difficult regional
Conﬂicts that destroyed millions of lives over decades.

0 In Sudan, the United States led international negotiations that peacefully resolved the
20-year conﬂict between the Government of Sudan and the Sudanese Peoples
Liberation Movement.

0 In Liberia, the United States led international efforts to restore peace and bolster
stability after vicious internal conﬂict.

0 Israeli forces have withdrawn from the Gaza Strip and the northern West Bank,
creating the prospect for transforming Israeli-Palestinian relations and underscoring
the need for the Palestinian Authority to stand up an effective, responsible
government.

0 Relations between India and Pakistan have improved, with an exchange of high-level
visits and a new spirit of cooperation in the dispute over Kashmir — a cooperation
made more tangible by humanitarian actions undertaken following a destructive
earthquake.

0 The cooperative approach to the relief effort following the tsunami that hit Indonesia
resulted in political shifts that helped make possible a peaceful settlement in the bitter
separatist conﬂict in Aceh.

0 In Northern Ireland, the implementation of key parts of the Good Friday Agreement,
including the decommissioning of weapons, marked a substantial milestone in ending

that long-standing civil conﬂict.

Numerous remaining regional challenges demand the world’s attention:

14 National Security Strategy

0 In Darfur, the people of an impoverished region are the victims of genocide arising
from a civil war that pits a murderous militia, backed by the Sudanese Government,
against a collection of rebel groups.

0 In Colombia, a democratic ally is fighting the persistent assaults of Marxist terrorists
and drug-traffickers.

0 In Venezuela, a demagogue awash in oil money is undermining democracy and
seeking to destabilize the region.

0 In Cuba, an anti-American dictator continues to oppress his people and seeks to
subvert freedom in the region.

0 In Uganda, a barbaric rebel cult — the Lord’s Resistance Army — is exploiting a
regional conﬂict and terrorizing a vulnerable population.

0 In Ethiopia and Eritrea, a festering border dispute threatens to erupt yet again into
open war.

0 In Nepal, a vicious Maoist insurgency continues to terrorize the population while the
government retreats from democracy.

C. The Way Ahead

Regional Conﬂicts can arise from a wide variety of causes, including poor governance,
external aggression, competing claims, internal revolt, tribal rivalries, and ethnic or
religious hatreds. If left unaddressed, however, these different causes lead to the same
ends: failed states, humanitarian disasters, and ungoverned areas that can become safe
havens for terrorists.

The Administration’s strategy for addressing regional Conﬂicts includes three levels of
engagement: conﬂict prevention and resolution; conﬂict intervention; and post-conﬂict
stabilization and reconstruction.

Effective international cooperation on these efforts is dependent on capable partners. To
this end, Congress has enacted new authorities that will permit the United States to train
and equip our foreign partners in a more timely and effective manner. Working with
Congress, we will continue to pursue foreign assistance reforms that allow the President
to draw on the skills of agencies across the United States Government.

1. Conﬂict Prevention and Resolution

The most effective long-term measure for conﬂict prevention and resolution is the
promotion of democracy. Effective democracies may still have disputes, but they are
equipped to resolve their differences peacefully, either bilaterally or by working with
other regional states or international institutions.

National Security Strategy 15

In the short term, however, a timely offer by free nations of “good offices” or outside
assistance can sometimes prevent conﬂict or help resolve conﬂict once started. Such
early measures can prevent problems from becoming crises and crises from becoming
wars. The United States is ready to play this role when appropriate. Even with outside
help, however, there is no substitute for bold and effective local leadership.

Progress in the short term may also depend upon the stances of key regional actors. The
most effective way to address a problem within one country may be by addressing the
wider regional context. This regional approach has particular application to Israeli-
Palestinian issues, the Conﬂicts in the Great Lakes region of Africa, and the conﬂict
within Nepal.

2. Conflict Intervention

Some Conﬂicts pose such a grave threat to our broader interests and values that conﬂict
intervention may be needed to restore peace and stability. Recent experience has
underscored that the international community does not have enough high-quality military
forces trained and capable of performing these peace operations. The Administration has
recognized this need and is working with the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)
to improve the capacity of states to intervene in conﬂict situations. We launched the
Global Peace Operations Initiative at the 2004 G-8 Summit to train peacekeepers for duty
in Africa. We are also supporting United Nations (U.N.) reform to improve its ability to
carry out peacekeeping missions with enhanced accountability, oversight, and results-
based management practices.

3. Post-Conflict Stabilization and Reconstruction

Once peace has been restored, the hard work of post-conﬂict stabilization and
reconstruction must begin. Military involvement may be necessary to stop a bloody
conﬂict, but peace and stability will last only if follow-on efforts to restore order and
rebuild are successful. The world has found through bitter experience that success often
depends on the early establishment of strong local institutions such as effective police
forces and a functioning justice and penal system. This governance capacity is critical to
establishing the rule of law and a free market economy, which provide long-term stability
and prosperity.

To develop these capabilities, the Administration established a new office in the
Department of State, the Office of the Coordinator for Reconstruction and Stabilization,
to plan and execute civilian stabilization and reconstruction efforts. The office draws on
all agencies of the government and integrates its activities with our military’s efforts.
The office will also coordinate United States Government efforts with other governments
building similar capabilities (such as the United Kingdom, Canada, the EU, and others),
as well as with new international efforts such as the U.N. Peacebuilding Commission.

16 National Security Strategy

4. Genocide

Patient efforts to end Conﬂicts should not be mistaken for tolerance of the intolerable.
Genocide is the intent to destroy in whole or in part a national, ethnic, racial, or religious
group. The world needs to start honoring a principle that many believe has lost its force
in parts of the international community in recent years: genocide must not be tolerated.

It is a moral imperative that states take action to prevent and punish genocide. History
teaches that sometimes other states will not act unless America does its part. We must
refine United States Government efforts — economic, diplomatic, and law-enforcement —
so that they target those individuals responsible for genocide and not the innocent citizens
they rule. Where perpetrators of mass killing defy all attempts at peaceful intervention,
armed intervention may be required, preferably by the forces of several nations working
together under appropriate regional or international auspices.

We must not allow the legal debate over the technical definition of “genocide” to excuse
inaction. The world must act in cases of mass atrocities and mass killing that will
eventually lead to genocide even if the local parties are not prepared for peace.

National Security Strategy 17

V. Prevent Our Enemies from Threatening Us, Our Allies, and Our Friends with
Weapons of Mass Destruction

A. Summary of National Security Strategy 2002

The security environment confronting the United States today is radically different from
what we have faced before. Yet the first duty of the United States Government remains
what it always has been: to protect the American people and American interests. It is an
enduring American principle that this duty obligates the government to anticipate and
counter threats, using all elements of national power, before the threats can do grave
damage. The greater the threat, the greater is the risk of inaction — and the more
compelling the case for taking anticipatory action to defend ourselves, even if uncertainty
remains as to the time and place of the enemy’s attack. There are few greater threats than
a terrorist attack with WMD.

To forestall or prevent such hostile acts by our adversaries, the United States will, if
necessary, act preemptively in exercising our inherent right of self-defense. The United
States will not resort to force in all cases to preempt emerging threats. Our preference is
that nonmilitary actions succeed. And no country should ever use preemption as a
pretext for aggression.

Countering proliferation of WMD requires a comprehensive strategy involving
strengthened nonproliferation efforts to deny these weapons of terror and related
expertise to those seeking them; proactive counterprolyferation eﬁorts to defend against
and defeat WMD and missile threats before they are unleashed; and improved protection
to mitigate the consequences of WMD use. We aim to convince our adversaries that they
cannot achieve their goals with WMD, and thus deter and dissuade them from attempting
to use or even acquire these weapons in the first place.

B. Current Context: Successes and Challenges

We have worked hard to protect our citizens and our security. The United States has
worked extensively with the international community and key partners to achieve
common objectives.

0 The United States has begun fielding ballistic missile defenses to deter and protect the
United States from missile attacks by rogue states armed with WMD. The fielding of
such missile defenses was made possible by the United States’ withdrawal from the
1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty, which was done in accordance with the treaty’s
provisions.

0 In May 2003, the Administration launched the Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI),
a global effort that aims to stop shipments of WMD, their delivery systems, and
related material. More than 70 countries have expressed support for this initiative,
and it has enjoyed several successes in impeding WMD trafficking.

18 National Security Strategy

0 United States leadership in extensive law enforcement and intelligence cooperation
involving several countries led to the roll-up of the A.Q. Khan nuclear network.

0 Libya voluntarily agreed to eliminate its WMD programs shortly after a PSI
interdiction of a shipment of nuclear-related material from the A.Q. Khan network to
Libya.

0 The United States led in securing passage in April 2004 of United Nations Security
Council (UNSC) Resolution 1540, requiring nations to criminalize WMD
proliferation and institute effective export and financial controls.

0 We have led the effort to strengthen the ability of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) to detect and respond to nuclear proliferation.

0 The Administration has established a new comprehensive framework, Biodefense for
the 21" Century, incorporating innovative initiatives to protect the United States
against bioterrorism.

Nevertheless, serious challenges remain:

0 Iran has violated its Non-Proliferation Treaty safeguards obligations and refuses to
provide objective guarantees that its nuclear program is solely for peaceful purposes.

0 The DPRK continues to destabilize its region and defy the international community,
now boasting a small nuclear arsenal and an illicit nuclear program in violation of its
international obligations.

0 Terrorists, including those associated with the al-Qaida network, continue to pursue
WMD.

0 Some of the world’s supply of weapons-grade fissile material — the necessary
ingredient for making nuclear weapons — is not properly protected.

0 Advances in biotechnology provide greater opportunities for state and non-state
actors to obtain dangerous pathogens and equipment.

C. The Way Ahead

We are committed to keeping the world’s most dangerous weapons out of the hands of
the world’s most dangerous people.

1. Nuclear Proliferation
The proliferation of nuclear weapons poses the greatest threat to our national security.

Nuclear weapons are unique in their capacity to inﬂict instant loss of life on a massive
scale. For this reason, nuclear weapons hold special appeal to rogue states and terrorists.

National Security Strategy 19

The best way to block aspiring nuclear states or nuclear terrorists is to deny them access
to the essential ingredient of ﬁssile material. It is much harder to deny states or terrorists
other key components, for nuclear weapons represent a 60-year old technology and the
knowledge is widespread. Therefore, our strategy focuses on controlling fissile material
with two priority objectives: first, to keep states from acquiring the capability to produce
fissile material suitable for making nuclear weapons; and second, to deter, interdict, or
prevent any transfer of that material from states that have this capability to rogue states or
to terrorists.

The first objective requires closing a loophole in the Non-Proliferation Treaty that
permits regimes to produce fissile material that can be used to make nuclear weapons
under cover of a civilian nuclear power program. To close this loophole, we have
proposed that the world’s leading nuclear exporters create a safe, orderly system that
spreads nuclear energy without spreading nuclear weapons. Under this system, all states
would have reliable access at reasonable cost to fuel for civilian nuclear power reactors.
In return, those states would remain transparent and renounce the enrichment and
reprocessing capabilities that can produce fissile material for nuclear weapons. In this
way, enrichment and reprocessing will not be necessary for nations seeking to harness
nuclear energy for strictly peaceful purposes.

The Administration has worked with the international community in confronting nuclear
proliferation.

We may face no greater challenge from a single country than from Iran. For almost 20
years, the Iranian regime hid many of its key nuclear efforts from the international
community. Yet the regime continues to claim that it does not seek to develop nuclear
weapons. The Iranian regime’s true intentions are clearly revealed by the regime’s
refusal to negotiate in good faith; its refusal to come into compliance with its
international obligations by providing the IAEA access to nuclear sites and resolving
troubling questions; and the aggressive statements of its President calling for Israel to “be
wiped off the face of the earth.” The United States has joined with our EU partners and
Russia to pressure Iran to meet its international obligations and provide objective
guarantees that its nuclear program is only for peaceful purposes. This diplomatic effort
must succeed if confrontation is to be avoided.

As important as are these nuclear issues, the United States has broader concerns
regarding Iran. The Iranian regime sponsors terrorism; threatens Israel; seeks to thwart
Middle East peace; disrupts democracy in Iraq; and denies the aspirations of its people
for freedom. The nuclear issue and our other concerns can ultimately be resolved only if
the Iranian regime makes the strategic decision to change these policies, open up its
political system, and afford freedom to its people. This is the ultimate goal of U.S.
policy. In the interim, we will continue to take all necessary measures to protect our
national and economic security against the adverse effects of their bad conduct. The
problems lie with the illicit behavior and dangerous ambition of the Iranian regime, not
the legitimate aspirations and interests of the Iranian people. Our strategy is to block the

20 National Security Strategy

threats posed by the regime while expanding our engagement and outreach to the people
the regime is oppressing.

The North Korean regime also poses a serious nuclear proliferation challenge. It presents
a long and bleak record of duplicity and bad-faith negotiations. In the past, the regime
has attempted to split the United States from its allies. This time, the United States has
successfully forged a consensus among key regional partners — China, Japan, Russia, and
the Republic of Korea (ROK) — that the DPRK must give up all of its existing nuclear
programs. Regional cooperation offers the best hope for a peaceful, diplomatic resolution
of this problem. In a joint statement signed on September 19, 2005, in the Six-Party
Talks among these participants, the DPRK agreed to abandon its nuclear weapons and all
existing nuclear programs. The joint statement also declared that the relevant parties
would negotiate a permanent peace for the Korean peninsula and explore ways to
promote security cooperation in Asia. Along with our partners in the Six-Party Talks, the
United States will continue to press the DPRK to implement these commitments.

The United States has broader concerns regarding the DPRK as well. The DPRK
counterfeits our currency; traffics in narcotics and engages in other illicit activities;
threatens the ROK with its army and its neighbors with its missiles; and brutalizes and
starves its people. The DPRK regime needs to change these policies, open up its political
system, and afford freedom to its people. In the interim, we will continue to take all
necessary measures to protect our national and economic security against the adverse
effects of their bad conduct.

The second nuclear proliferation objective is to keep fissile material out of the hands
of rogue states and terrorists. To do this we must address the danger posed by
inadequately safeguarded nuclear and radiological materials worldwide. The
Administration is leading a global effort to reduce and secure such materials as quickly as
possible through several initiatives including the Global Threat Reduction Initiative
(GTRI). The GTRI locates, tracks, and reduces existing stockpiles of nuclear material.
This new initiative also discourages trafficking in nuclear material by emplacing
detection equipment at key transport nodes.

Building on the success of the PSI, the United States is also leading international efforts
to shut down WMD trafficking by targeting key maritime and air transportation and
transshipment routes, and by cutting off proliferators from financial resources that
support their activities.

2. Biological Weapons

Biological weapons also pose a grave WMD threat because of the risks of contagion that
would spread disease across large populations and around the globe. Unlike nuclear
weapons, biological weapons do not require hard-to-acquire infrastructure or materials.
This makes the challenge of controlling their spread even greater.

National Security Strategy 21

Countering the spread of biological weapons requires a strategy focused on improving
our capacity to detect and respond to biological attacks, securing dangerous pathogens,
and limiting the spread of materials useful for biological weapons. The United States is
working with partner nations and institutions to strengthen global biosurveillance
capabilities for early detection of suspicious outbreaks of disease. We have launched
new initiatives at home to modernize our public health infrastructure and to encourage
industry to speed the development of new classes of vaccines and medical
countermeasures. This will also enhance our Nation’s ability to respond to pandemic
public health threats, such as avian inﬂuenza.

3. Chemical Weapons

Chemical weapons are a serious proliferation concern and are actively sought by
terrorists, including al-Qaida. Much like biological weapons, the threat from chemical
weapons increases with advances in technology, improvements in agent development,
and ease in acquisition of materials and equipment.

To deter and defend against such threats, we work to identify and disrupt terrorist
networks that seek chemical weapons capabilities, and seek to deny them access to
materials needed to make these weapons. We are improving our detection and other
chemical defense capabilities at home and abroad, including ensuring that U.S. military
forces and emergency responders are trained and equipped to manage the consequences
of a chemical weapons attack.

4. The Need for Action

The new strategic environment requires new approaches to deterrence and defense. Our
deterrence strategy no longer rests primarily on the grim premise of inﬂicting devastating
consequences on potential foes. Both offenses and defenses are necessary to deter state
and non-state actors, through denial of the objectives of their attacks and, if necessary,
responding with overwhelming force.

Safe, credible, and reliable nuclear forces continue to play a critical role. We are
strengthening deterrence by developing a New Triad composed of offensive strike
systems (both nuclear and improved conventional capabilities); active and passive
defenses, including missile defenses; and a responsive infrastructure, all bound together
by enhanced command and control, planning, and intelligence systems. These
capabilities will better deter some of the new threats we face, while also bolstering our
security commitments to allies. Such security commitments have played a crucial role in
convincing some countries to forgo their own nuclear weapons programs, thereby aiding
our nonproliferation objectives.

Deterring potential foes and assuring friends and allies, however, is only part of a broader
approach. Meeting WMD proliferation challenges also requires effective international
action — and the international community is most engaged in such action when the United
States leads.

22 National Security Strategy

Taking action need not involve military force. Our strong preference and common
practice is to address proliferation concerns through international diplomacy, in concert
with key allies and regional partners. If necessary, however, under long-standing
principles of self defense, we do not rule out the use of force before attacks occur, even if
uncertainty remains as to the time and place of the enemy’s attack. When the
consequences of an attack with WMD are potentially so devastating, we cannot afford to
stand idly by as grave dangers materialize. This is the principle and logic of preemption.
The place of preemption in our national security strategy remains the same. We will
always proceed deliberately, weighing the consequences of our actions. The reasons for
our actions will be clear, the force measured, and the cause just.

Iraq and Weapons of Mass Destruction

This Administration inherited an Iraq threat that was unresolved. In early 2001, the international
support for U.N. sanctions and continued limits on the Iraqi regime’s weapons-related activity
was eroding, and key UNSC members were asking that they be lifted.

For America, the September 11 attacks underscored the danger of allowing threats to linger
unresolved. Saddam Hussein’s continued defiance of 16 UNSC resolutions over 12 years,
combined with his record of invading neighboring countries, supporting terrorists, tyrannizing
his own people, and using chemical weapons, presented a threat we could no longer ignore.

The UNSC unanimously passed Resolution 1441 on November 8, 2002, calling for full and
immediate compliance by the Iraqi regime with its disarmament obligations. Once again,
Saddam defied the international community. According to the Iraq Survey Group, the team of
inspectors that went into Iraq after Saddam Hussein was toppled and whose report provides the
fullest accounting of the Iraqi regime’s illicit activities:

“Saddam continued to see the utility of WMD. He explained that he purposely gave an
ambiguous impression about possession as a deterrent to Iran. He gave explicit direction to
maintain the intellectual capabilities. As U.N. sanctions eroded there was a concomitant
expansion ofactivities that could supportfull WMD reactivation. He directed that ballistic
missile work continue that would support long-range missile development. Virtually no senior
Iraqi believed that Saddam had forsaken WMD forever. Evidence suggests that, as resources
became available and the constraints of sanctions decayed, there was a direct expansion of
activigi that would have the eﬂect of supporting future WMD reconstitution.”

With the elimination of Saddam’s regime, this threat has been addressed, once and for all.

The Iraq Survey Group also found that pre-war intelligence estimates of Iraqi WMD stockpiles
were wrong — a conclusion that has been confirmed by a bipartisan commission and
congressional investigations. We must learn from this experience if we are to counter
successfully the very real threat of proliferation.

First, our intelligence must improve. The President and the Congress have taken steps to
reorganize and strengthen the U.S. intelligence community. A single, accountable leader of the

National Security Strategy 23

intelligence community with authorities to match his responsibilities, and increased sharing of
information and increased resources, are helping realize this objective.

Second, there will always be some uncertainty about the status of hidden programs since
proliferators are often brutal regimes that go to great lengths to conceal their activities. Indeed,
prior to the 1991 Gulf War, many intelligence analysts underestimated the WMD threat posed by
the Iraqi regime. After that conﬂict, they were surprised to learn how far Iraq had progressed
along various pathways to try to produce fissile material.

Third, Saddam’s strategy of bluff, denial, and deception is a dangerous game that dictators
play at their peril. The world offered Saddam a clear choice: effect full and immediate
compliance with his disarmament obligations or face serious consequences. Saddam chose the
latter course and is now facing judgment in an Iraqi court. It was Saddam’s reckless behavior
that demanded the world’s attention, and it was his refusal to remove the ambiguity that he
created that forced the United States and its allies to act. We have no doubt that the world is a
better place for the removal of this dangerous and unpredictable tyrant, and we have no doubt
that the world is better off if tyrants know that they pursue WMD at their own peril.

24 National Security Strategy

VI.

Ignite a New Era of Global Economic Growth through Free Markets and Free
Trade

A. Summary of National Security Strategy 2002

Promoting free and fair trade has long been a bedrock tenet of American foreign policy.
Greater economic freedom is ultimately inseparable from political liberty. Economic
freedom empowers individuals, and empowered individuals increasingly demand greater
political freedom. Greater economic freedom also leads to greater economic opportunity
and prosperity for everyone. History has judged the market economy as the single most
effective economic system and the greatest antidote to poverty. To expand economic
liberty and prosperity, the United States promotes free and fair trade, open markets, a
stable financial system, the integration of the global economy, and secure, clean energy
development.

B. Current Context: Successes and Challenges

The global economy is more open and free, and many people around the world have seen
their lives improve as prosperity and economic integration have increased. The
Administration has accomplished much of the economic freedom agenda it set out in
2002:

Seizing the global initiative. We have worked to open markets and integrate the global
economy through launching the Doha Development Agenda negotiations of the World
Trade Organization (WTO). The United States put forward bold and historic proposals to
reform global agricultural trade, to eliminate farm export subsidies and reduce trade-
distorting support programs, to eliminate all tariffs on consumer and industrial goods, and
to open global services markets. When negotiations stalled in 2003, the United States
took the initiative to put Doha back on track, culminating in a successful framework
agreement reached in Geneva in 2004. As talks proceed, the United States continues to
lead the world in advancing bold proposals for economic freedom through open markets.
We also have led the way in helping the accessions of new WTO members such as
Armenia, Cambodia, Macedonia, and Saudi Arabia.

Pressing regional and bilateral trade initiatives. We have used FTAs to open markets,
support economic reform and the rule of law, and create new opportunities for American
farmers and workers. Since 2001, we have:

0 Implemented or completed negotiations for FTAs with 14 countries on 5 continents,
and are negotiating agreements with 11 additional countries;

0 Partnered with Congress to pass the Central America Free Trade Agreement —
Dominican Republic (CAFTA-DR), long sought by the leaders of El Salvador,
Honduras, Guatemala, Nicaragua, Costa Rica, and Dominican Republic;

National Security Strategy 25

0 Called in 2003 for the creation of a Middle East Free Trade Area (MEFTA) by 2013
to bring the Middle East into an expanding circle of opportunity;

0 Negotiated FTAs with Bahrain, Jordan, Morocco, and Oman to provide a foundation
for the MEFTA initiative;

0 Launched in 2002 the Enterprise for ASEAN Initiative, which led to the completion
of a free trade agreement with Singapore, and the launch of negotiations with
Thailand and Malaysia;

0 Concluded an FTA with Australia, one of America’s strongest allies in the Asia-
Pacific region and a major trading partner of the United States; and

0 Continued to promote the opportunities of increased trade to sub-Saharan Africa
through the African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA), and extended opportunity
to many other developing countries through the Generalized System of Preferences.

Pressing for open markets, financial stability, and deeper integration of the world
economy. We have partnered with Europe, Japan, and other major economies to promote
structural reforms that encourage growth, stability, and opportunity across the globe. The
United States has:

0 Gained agreement in the G-7 on the Agenda for Growth, which commits member
states to take concrete steps to reform domestic economic systems;

0 Worked with other nations that serve as regional and global engines of growth — such
as India, China, the ROK, Brazil, and Russia — on reforms to open markets and ensure
ﬁnancial stability;

0 Urged China to move to a market-based, ﬂexible exchange rate regime — a step that
would help both China and the global economy; and

0 Pressed for reform of the International Financial Institutions to focus on results,
fostering good governance and sound policies, and freeing poor countries from
unpayable debts.

Enhancing energy security and clean development. The Administration has worked
with trading partners and energy producers to expand the types and sources of energy, to
open markets and strengthen the rule of law, and to foster private investment that can
help develop the energy needed to meet global demand. In addition, we have:

0 Worked with industrialized and emerging nations on hydrogen, clean coal, and
advanced nuclear technologies; and

26 National Security Strategy

0 Joined with Australia, China, India, Japan, and the ROK in forming the Asia-Pacific
Partnership for Clean Development and Climate to accelerate deployment of clean
technologies to enhance energy security, reduce poverty, and reduce pollution.

Several challenges remain:

0 Protectionist impulses in many countries put at risk the benefits of open markets and
impede the expansion of free and fair trade and economic growth.

0 Nations that lack the rule of law are prone to corruption, lack of transparency, and
poor governance. These nations frustrate the economic aspirations of their people by
failing to promote entrepreneurship, protect intellectual property, or allow their
citizens access to vital investment capital.

0 Many countries are too dependent upon foreign oil, which is often imported from
unstable parts of the world.

0 Economic integration spreads wealth across the globe, but also makes local
economies more subject to global market conditions.

0 Some governments restrict the free ﬂow of capital, subverting the vital role that wise
investment can play in promoting economic growth. This denies investments,
economic opportunity, and new jobs to the people who need them most.

C. The Way Ahead

Economic freedom is a moral imperative. The liberty to create and build or to buy, sell,
and own property is fundamental to human nature and foundational to a free society.
Economic freedom also reinforces political freedom. It creates diversiﬁed centers of
power and authority that limit the reach of government. It expands the free ﬂow of ideas;
with increased trade and foreign investment comes exposure to new ways of thinking and
living which give citizens more control over their own lives.

To continue extending liberty and prosperity, and to meet the challenges that remain, our
strategy going forward involves:

1. Opening markets and integrating developing countries.

While most of the world affirms in principle the appeal of economic liberty, in practice
too many nations hold fast to the false comforts of subsidies and trade barriers. Such
distortions of the market stiﬂe growth in developed countries, and slow the escape from
poverty in developing countries. Against these short-sighted impulses, the United States
promotes the enduring vision of a global economy that welcomes all participants and
encourages the voluntary exchange of goods and services based on mutual benefit, not
favoritism.

National Security Strategy 27

We will continue to advance this agenda through the WTO and through bilateral and
regional FTAs.

0 The United States will seek completion of the Doha Development Agenda
negotiations. A successful Doha agreement will expand opportunities for Americans
and for others around the world. Trade and open markets will empower citizens in
developing countries to improve their lives, while reducing the opportunities for
corruption that afﬂict state-controlled economies.

0 We will continue to work with countries such as Russia, Ukraine, Kazakhstan, and
Vietnam on the market reforms needed to join the WTO. Participation in the WTO
brings opportunities as well as obligations — to strengthen the rule of law and honor
the intellectual property rights that sustain the modern knowledge economy, and to
remove tariffs, subsidies, and other trade barriers that distort global markets and harm
the world’s poor.

0 We will advance MEFTA by completing and bringing into force FTAs for Bahrain,
Oman, and the United Arab Emirates and through other initiatives to expand open
trade with and among countries in the region.

0 In Africa, we are pursuing an FTA with the countries of the Southern African
Customs Union: Botswana, Lesotho, Namibia, South Africa, and Swaziland.

0 In Asia, we are pursuing FTAs with Thailand, the ROK, and Malaysia. We will also
continue to work closely with China to ensure it honors its WTO commitments and
protects intellectual property.

0 In our own hemisphere, we will advance the vision of a free trade area of the
Americas by building on North American Free Trade Agreement, CAFTA-DR, and
the FTA with Chile. We will complete and bring into force FTAs with Colombia,
Peru, Ecuador, and Panama.

2. Opening, integrating, and diversifying energy markets to ensure energy
independence.

Most of the energy that drives the global economy comes from fossil fuels, especially
petroleum. The United States is the world’s third largest oil producer, but we rely on
international sources to supply more than 50 percent of our needs. Only a small number
of countries make major contributions to the world’s oil supply.

The world’s dependence on these few suppliers is neither responsible nor sustainable
over the long term. The key to ensuring our energy security is diversity in the regions
from which energy resources come and in the types of energy resources on which we
rely.

28 National Security Strategy

0 The Administration will work with resource-rich countries to increase their openness,
transparency, and rule of law. This will promote effective democratic governance
and attract the investment essential to developing their resources and expanding the
range of energy suppliers.

0 We will build the Global Nuclear Energy Partnership to work with other nations to
develop and deploy advanced nuclear recycling and reactor technologies. This
initiative will help provide reliable, emission-free energy with less of the waste
burden of older technologies and without making available separated plutonium that
could be used by rogue states or terrorists for nuclear weapons. These new
technologies will make possible a dramatic expansion of safe, clean nuclear energy to
help meet the growing global energy demand.

0 We will work with international partners to develop other transformational
technologies such as clean coal and hydrogen. Through projects like our FutureGen
initiative, we seek to turn our abundant domestic coal into emissions-free sources of
electricity and hydrogen, providing our economies increased power with decreased
emissions.

0 On the domestic front, we are investing in zero-emission coal-fired plants;
revolutionary solar and wind technologies; clean, safe nuclear energy; and cutting-
edge methods of producing ethanol.

Our comprehensive energy strategy puts a priority on reducing our reliance on foreign
energy sources. Diversification of energy sources also will help alleviate the “petroleum
curse” — the tendency for oil revenues to foster corruption and prevent economic growth
and political reform in some oil-producing states. In too many such nations, ruling elites
enrich themselves while denying the people the benefits of their countries’ natural
wealth. In the worst cases, oil revenues fund activities that destabilize their regions or
advance violent ideologies. Diversifying the suppliers within and across regions reduces
opportunities for corruption and diminishes the leverage of irresponsible rulers.

3. Reforming the International Financial System to Ensure Stability and Growth

In our interconnected world, stable and open financial markets are an essential feature of
a prosperous global economy. We will work to improve the stability and openness of
markets by:

0 Promoting Growth-Oriented Economic Policies Worldwide. Sound policies in the
United States have helped drive much international growth. We cannot be the only
source of strength, however. We will work with the world’s other major economies,
including the EU and Japan, to promote structural reforms that open their markets and
increase productivity in their nations and across the world.

0 Encouraging Adoption of Flexible Exchange Rates and Open Markets for
Financial Services. The United States will help emerging economies make the

National Security Strategy 29

transition to the ﬂexible exchange rates appropriate for major economies. In
particular, we will continue to urge China to meet its own commitment to a market-
based, ﬂexible exchange rate regime. We will also promote more open ﬁnancial
service markets, which encourage stable and sound financial practices.

0 Strengthening International Financial Institutions. At the dawn of a previous era
6 decades ago, the United States championed the creation of the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund (IMF). These institutions were instrumental in the
development of the global economy and an expansion of prosperity unprecedented in
world history. They remain vital today, but must adapt to new realities:

0 For the World Bank and regional development banks, we will encourage greater
emphasis on investments in the private sector. We will urge more consideration
of economic freedom, governance, and measurable results in allocating funds.
We will promote an increased use of grants to relieve the burden of unsustainable
debt.

0 For the IMF, we will seek to refocus it on its core mission: international financial
stability. This means strengthening the IMF’s ability to monitor the ﬁnancial
system to prevent crises before they happen. If crises occur, the IMF’s response
must reinforce each country’s responsibility for its own economic choices. A
refocused IMF will strengthen market institutions and market discipline over
financial decisions, helping to promote a stable and prosperous global economy.
By doing so, over time markets and the private sector can supplant the need for
the IMF to perform in its current role.

0 Building Local Capital Markets and the Formal Economy in the Developing
World. The first place that small businesses in developing countries turn to for
resources is their own domestic markets. Unfortunately, in too many countries these
resources are unavailable due to weak financial systems, a lack of property rights, and
the diversion of economic activity away from the formal economy into the black
market. The United States will work with these countries to develop and strengthen
local capital markets and reduce the black market. This will provide more resources
to helping the public sector govern effectively and the private sector grow and
prosper.

0 Creating a More Transparent, Accountable, and Secure International Financial
System. The United States has worked with public and private partners to help
secure the international financial system against abuse by criminals, terrorists, money
launderers, and corrupt political leaders. We will continue to use international venues
like the Financial Action Task Force to ensure that this global system is transparent
and protected from abuse by tainted capital. We must also develop new tools that
allow us to detect, disrupt, and isolate rogue financial players and gatekeepers.

30 National Security Strategy

VII.

Expand the Circle of Development bv Opening Societies and Building the
Infrastructure of Democracy

A. Summary of National Security Strategy 2002

Helping the world’s poor is a strategic priority and a moral imperative. Economic
development, responsible governance, and individual liberty are intimately connected.
Past foreign assistance to corrupt and ineffective governments failed to help the
populations in greatest need. Instead, it often impeded democratic reform and
encouraged corruption. The United States must promote development programs that
achieve measurable results — rewarding reforms, encouraging transparency, and
improving people’s lives. Led by the United States, the international community has
endorsed this approach in the Monterrey Consensus.

B. Current Context: Successes and Challenges

The United States has improved the lives of millions of people and transformed the
practice of development by adopting more effective policies and programs.

0 Advancing Development and Reinforcing Reform. The Administration pioneered
a revolution in development strategy with the Millennium Challenge Account
program, rewarding countries that govern justly, invest in their people, and foster
economic freedom. The program is based on the principle that each nation bears the
responsibility for its own development. It offers governments the opportunity and the
means to undertake transformational change by designing their own reform and
development programs, which are then funded through the Millennium Challenge
Corporation (MCC). The MCC has approved over $1.5 billion for compacts in eight
countries, is working with over a dozen other countries on compacts, and has
committed many smaller grants to other partner countries.

0 Turning the Tide Against AIDS and Other Infectious Diseases. The President’s
Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief is an unprecedented, 5-year, $15 billion effort.
Building on the success of pioneering programs in Africa, we have launched a major
initiative that will prevent 7 million new infections, provide treatment to 2 million
infected individuals, and care for 10 million AIDS orphans and others affected by the
disease. We have launched a $1.2 billion, 5-year initiative to reduce malaria deaths
by 50 percent in at least 15 targeted countries. To mobilize other nations and the
private sector, the United States pioneered the creation of the Global Fund to Fight
HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria. We are the largest donor to the Fund and
have already contributed over $1.4 billion.

0 Promoting Debt Sustainability and a Path Toward Private Capital Markets. The
Administration has sought to break the burden of debt that traps many poor countries
by encouraging international financial institutions to provide grants instead of loans
to low-income nations. With the United Kingdom, we spearheaded the G-8 initiative
to provide 100 percent multilateral debt relief to qualifying Heavily Indebted Poor

National Security Strategy 31

Countries. Reducing debt to sustainable levels allows countries to focus on
immediate development challenges. In the long run, reducing debt also opens access
to private capital markets which foster sound policies and long-term growth.

0 Addressing Urgent Needs and Investing in People. The United States leads the
world in providing food relief. We launched the Initiative to End Hunger in Africa,
using science, technology, and market incentives to increase the productivity of
African farmers. We launched a 3-year, $900 million initiative to provide clean water
to the poor. We have tripled basic education assistance through programs such as the
Africa Education Initiative, which will train teachers and administrators, build
schools, buy textbooks, and expand opportunities inside and outside the classroom.

0 Unleashing the Power of the Private Sector. The Administration has sought to
multiply the impact of our development assistance through initiatives such as the
Global Development Alliance, which forges partnerships with the private sector to
advance development goals, and Volunteers for Prosperity, which enlists some of our
Nation’s most capable professionals to serve strategically in developing nations.

0 Fighting Corruption and Promoting Transparency. Through multilateral efforts
like the G-8 Transparency Initiative and our policy of denying corrupt foreign
officials entry into the United States, we are helping ensure that organized crime and
parasitic rulers do not choke off the benefits of economic assistance and growth.

We have increased our overall development assistance spending by 97 percent since
2000. In all of these efforts, the United States has sought concrete measures of success.
Funding is a means, not the end. We are giving more money to help the world’s poor,
and giving it more effectively.

Many challenges remain, including:

0 Helping millions of people in the world who continue to suffer from poverty and
disease;

0 Ensuring that the delivery of assistance reinforces good governance and sound
economic policies; and

0 Building the capacity of poor countries to take ownership of their own development
strategies.

C. The Way Ahead

America’s national interests and moral values drive us in the same direction: to assist the
world’s poor citizens and least developed nations and help integrate them into the global
economy. We have accomplished many of the goals laid out in the 2002 National
Security Strategy. Many of the new initiatives we launched in the last 4 years are now

32 National Security Strategy

fully operating to help the plight of the world’s least fortunate. We will persevere on this
path.

Development reinforces diplomacy and defense, reducing long-term threats to our
national security by helping to build stable, prosperous, and peaceful societies.
Improving the way we use foreign assistance will make it more effective in strengthening
responsible governments, responding to suffering, and improving people’s lives.

1. Transformational Diplomacy and Effective Democracy

Transformational diplomacy means working with our many international partners to build
and sustain democratic, well-governed states that will respond to the needs of their
citizens and conduct themselves responsibly in the international system. Long-term
development must include encouraging governments to make wise choices and assisting
them in implementing those choices. We will encourage and reward good behavior
rather than reinforce negative behavior. Ultimately it is the countries themselves that
must decide to take the necessary steps toward development, yet we will help advance
this process by creating external incentives for governments to reform themselves.

Effective economic development advances our national security by helping promote
responsible sovereignty, not permanent dependency. Weak and impoverished states and
ungoverned areas are not only a threat to their people and a burden on regional
economies, but are also susceptible to exploitation by terrorists, tyrants, and international
criminals. We will work to bolster threatened states, provide relief in times of crisis, and
build capacity in developing states to increase their progress.

2. Making Foreign Assistance More Effective

The Administration has created the new position of Director of Foreign Assistance (DFA)
in the State Department. The DFA will serve concurrently as Administrator of U.S.
Agency for International Development (USAID), a position that will continue to be at the
level of Deputy Secretary, and will have, consistent with existing legal requirements,
authority over all State Department and USAID foreign assistance. This reorganization
will create a more unified and rational structure that will more fully align assistance
programs in State and USAID, increase the effectiveness of these programs for recipient
countries, and ensure that we are being the best possible stewards of taxpayer dollars.
And it will focus our foreign assistance on promoting greater ownership and
responsibility on the part of host nations and their citizens.

With this new authority, the DFA/Administrator will develop a coordinated foreign
assistance strategy, including 5-year, country-specific assistance strategies and annual
country-specific assistance operational plans. The DFA/Administrator also will provide
guidance for the assistance delivered through other entities of the United States
Government, including the MCC and the Office of the Global AIDS Coordinator.

National Security Strategy 33

To ensure the best stewardship of our foreign assistance, the United States will:

0 Distinguish among the different challenges facing different nations and address those
challenges with tools appropriate for each country’s stage of development;

0 Encourage and reward good government and economic reform, both bilaterally and
through the multilateral institutions such as international financial institutions, the
G-8, and the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC);

0 Engage the private sector to help solve development problems;

0 Promote graduation from economic aid dependency with the ultimate goal of ending
assistance;

0 Build trade capacity to enable the poorest countries to enter into the global trade
system; and

0 Empower local leaders to take responsibility for their country’s development.
Our assistance efforts will also highlight and build on the lessons learned from successful

examples of wise development and economic policy choices, such as the ROK, Taiwan,
Ireland, Poland, Slovakia, Chile, and Botswana.

34 National Security Strategy

VIII.

Develop Agendas for Cooperative Action with the Other Main Centers of Global
Power

A. Summary of National Security Strategy 2002

Relations with the most powerful countries in the world are central to our national
security strategy. Our priority is pursuing American interests within cooperative
relationships, particularly with our oldest and closest friends and allies. At the same
time, we must seize the opportunity — unusual in historical terms — of an absence of
fundamental conﬂict between the great powers. Another priority, therefore, is preventing
the reemergence of the great power rivalries that divided the world in previous eras. New
times demand new approaches, ﬂexible enough to permit effective action even when
there are reasonable differences of opinions among friends, yet strong enough to confront
the challenges the world faces.

B. Current Context: Successes and Challenges

The United States has enjoyed unprecedented levels of cooperation on many of its
highest national security priorities:

0 The global coalition against terror has grown and deepened, with extensive
cooperation and common resolve. The nations that have partnered with us in
Afghanistan and Iraq have developed capabilities that can be applied to other
challenges.

0 We have joined with other nations around the world as well as numerous multilateral
organizations to improve the capability of all nations to defend their homelands
against terrorists and transnational criminals.

0 We have achieved extraordinary coordination among historic rivals in pressing the
DPRK to abandon its nuclear program.

0 We have partnered with European allies and international institutions to pressure Iran
to honor its non-proliferation commitments.

0 The North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) is transforming itself to meet
current threats and is playing a leading role in stabilizing the Balkans and
Afghanistan, as well as training the Iraqi military leadership to address its security
challenges.

0 We have set aside decades of mistrust and put relations with India, the world’s most
populous democracy, on a new and fruitful path.

At the same time, America’s relations with other nations have been strong enough to
withstand differences and candid exchanges of views.

National Security Strategy 35

0 Some of our oldest and closest friends disagreed with U.S. policy in Iraq. There are
ongoing and serious debates with our allies about how best to address the unique and
evolving nature of the global terrorist threat.

0 We have disagreed on the steps to reduce agricultural subsidies and achieve success
in the WTO Doha Round of trade negotiations. We have also faced challenges in
forging consensus with other major nations on the most effective measures to protect
the environment.

C. The Way Ahead

The struggle against militant Islamic radicalism is the great ideological conﬂict of the
early years of the 21“ century and finds the great powers all on the same side — opposing
the terrorists. This circumstance differs profoundly from the ideological struggles of the
20th century, which saw the great powers divided by ideology as well as by national
interest.

The potential for great power consensus presents the United States with an extraordinary
opportunity. Yet certain challenges must be overcome. Some nations differ with us on
the appropriate pace of change. Other nations provide rhetorical support for free markets
and effective democracy but little action on freedom’s behalf.

Five principles undergird our strategy for relations with the main centers of global power.

0 First, these relations must be set in their proper context. Bilateral policies that ignore
regional and global realities are unlikely to succeed.

0 Second, these relations must be supported by appropriate institutions, regional and
global, to make cooperation more permanent, effective, and wide-reaching. Where
existing institutions can be reformed to meet new challenges, we, along with our
partners, must reform them. Where appropriate institutions do not exist, we, along
with our partners, must create them.

0 Third, we cannot pretend that our interests are unaffected by states’ treatment of their
own citizens. America’s interest in promoting effective democracies rests on an
historical fact: states that are governed well are most inclined to behave well. We
will encourage all our partners to expand liberty, and to respect the rule of law and
the dignity of the individual, as the surest way to advance the welfare of their people
and to cement close relations with the United States.

0 Fourth, while we do not seek to dictate to other states the choices they make, we do
seek to inﬂuence the calculations on which these choices are based. We also must
hedge appropriately in case states choose unwisely.

36 National Security Strategy

0 Fifth, we must be prepared to act alone if necessary, while recognizing that there is
little of lasting consequence that we can accomplish in the world without the
sustained cooperation of our allies and partners.

1. The Western Hemisphere

These principles guide our relations within our own Hemisphere, the frontline of defense
of American national security. Our goal remains a hemisphere fully democratic, bound
together by good will, security cooperation, and the opportunity for all our citizens to
prosper. Tyrants and those who would follow them belong to a different era and must not
be allowed to reverse the progress of the last two decades. Countries in the Hemisphere
must be helped to the path of sustained political and economic development. The
deceptive appeal of anti-free market populism must not be allowed to erode political
freedoms and trap the Hemisphere’s poorest in cycles of poverty. If America’s nearest
neighbors are not secure and stable, then Americans will be less secure.

Our strategy for the Hemisphere begins with deepening key relationships with Canada
and Mexico, a foundation of shared values and cooperative policies that can be extended
throughout the region. We must continue to work with our neighbors in the Hemisphere
to reduce illegal immigration and promote expanded economic opportunity for
marginalized populations. We must also solidify strategic relationships with regional
leaders in Central and South America and the Caribbean who are deepening their
commitment to democratic values. And we must continue to work with regional partners
to make multilateral institutions like the OAS and the Inter-American Development Bank
more effective and better able to foster concerted action to address threats that may arise
to the region’s stability, security, prosperity, or democratic progress. Together, these
partnerships can advance our four strategic priorities for the region: bolstering security,
strengthening democratic institutions, promoting prosperity, and investing in people.

2. Africa

Africa holds growing geo-strategic importance and is a high priority of this
Administration. It is a place of promise and opportunity, linked to the United States by
history, culture, commerce, and strategic significance. Our goal is an African continent
that knows liberty, peace, stability, and increasing prosperity.

Africa’s potential has in the past been held hostage by the bitter legacy of colonial
misrule and bad choices by some African leaders. The United States recognizes that our
security depends upon partnering with Africans to strengthen fragile and failing states
and bring ungoverned areas under the control of effective democracies.

Overcoming the challenges Africa faces requires partnership, not paternalism. Our
strategy is to promote economic development and the expansion of effective, democratic
governance so that African states can take the lead in addressing African challenges.
Through improved governance, reduced corruption, and market reforms, African nations
can lift themselves toward a better future. We are committed to working with African

National Security Strategy 37

nations to strengthen their domestic capabilities and the regional capacity of the AU to
support post-conﬂict transformations, consolidate democratic transitions, and improve
peacekeeping and disaster responses.

3. Middle East

The Broader Middle East continues to command the world’s attention. For too long, too
many nations of the Middle East have suffered from a freedom deficit. Repression has
fostered corruption, imbalanced or stagnant economies, political resentments, regional
Conﬂicts, and religious extremism. These maladies were all cloaked by an illusion of
stability. Yet the peoples of the Middle East share the same desires as people in the rest
of the world: liberty, opportunity, justice, order, and peace. These desires are now being
expressed in movements for reform. The United States is committed to supporting the
efforts of reformers to realize a better life for themselves and their region.

We seek a Middle East of independent states, at peace with each other, and fully
participating in an open global market of goods, services, and ideas. We are seeking to
build a framework that will allow Israel and the Palestinian territories to live side by side
in peace and security as two democratic states. In the wider region, we will continue to
support efforts for reform and freedom in traditional allies such as Egypt and Saudi
Arabia. Tyrannical regimes such as Iran and Syria that oppress at home and sponsor
terrorism abroad know that we will continue to stand with their people against their
misrule. And in Iraq, we will continue to support the Iraqi people and their historic
march from tyranny to effective democracy. We will work with the freely elected,
democratic government of Iraq — our new partner in the War on Terror — to consolidate
and expand freedom, and to build security and lasting stability.

4. Europe

The North Atlantic Treaty Organization remains a vital pillar of U.S. foreign policy. The
Alliance has been strengthened by expanding its membership and now acts beyond its
borders as an instrument for peace and stability in many parts of the world. It has also
established partnerships with other key European states, including Russia, Ukraine, and
others, further extending NATO's historic transformation. The internal reform of NATO
structures, capabilities, and procedures must be accelerated to ensure that NATO is able
to carry out its missions effectively. The Alliance’s door will also remain open to those
countries that aspire for membership and meet NATO standards. Further, NATO must
deepen working relationships between and across institutions, as it is doing with the EU,
and as it also could do with new institutions. Such relationships offer opportunities for
enhancing the distinctive strengths and missions of each organization.

Europe is home to some of our oldest and closest allies. Our cooperative relations are
built on a sure foundation of shared values and interests. This foundation is expanding
and deepening with the ongoing spread of effective democracies in Europe, and must
expand and deepen still further if we are to reach the goal of a Europe whole, free, and at
peace. These democracies are effective partners, joining with us to promote global

38 National Security Strategy

freedom and prosperity. Just as in the special relationship that binds us to the United
Kingdom, these cooperative relationships forge deeper ties between our nations.

5. Russia

The United States seeks to work closely with Russia on strategic issues of common
interest and to manage issues on which we have differing interests. By reason of
geography and power, Russia has great inﬂuence not only in Europe and its own
immediate neighborhood, but also in many other regions of vital interest to us: the
broader Middle East, South and Central Asia, and East Asia. We must encourage Russia
to respect the values of freedom and democracy at home and not to impede the cause of
freedom and democracy in these regions. Strengthening our relationship will depend on
the policies, foreign and domestic, that Russia adopts. Recent trends regrettably point
toward a diminishing commitment to democratic freedoms and institutions. We will
work to try to persuade the Russian Government to move forward, not backward, along
freedom’s path.

Stability and prosperity in Russia’s neighborhood will help deepen our relations with
Russia; but that stability will remain elusive as long as this region is not governed by
effective democracies. We will seek to persuade Russia’s government that democratic
progress in Russia and its region benefits the peoples who live there and improves
relationships with us, with other Western governments, and among themselves.
Conversely, efforts to prevent democratic development at home and abroad will hamper
the development of Russia’s relations with the United States, Europe, and its neighbors.

6. South and Central Asia

South and Central Asia is a region of great strategic importance where American interests
and values are engaged as never before. India is a great democracy, and our shared
values are the foundation of our good relations. We are eager to see Pakistan move along
a stable, secure, and democratic path. Our goal is for the entire region of South and
Central Asia to be democratic, prosperous, and at peace.

We have made great strides in transforming America’s relationship with India, a major
power that shares our commitment to freedom, democracy, and rule of law. In July 2005,
we signed a bold agreement — a roadmap to realize the meaningful cooperation that had
eluded our two nations for decades. India now is poised to shoulder global obligations in
cooperation with the United States in a way befitting a major power.

Progress with India has been achieved even as the United States has improved its
strategic relationship with Pakistan. For decades, outsiders acted as if good relations with
India and Pakistan were mutually exclusive. This Administration has shown that
improved relations with each are possible and can help India and Pakistan make strides
toward a lasting peace between themselves. America’s relationship with Pakistan will
not be a mirror image of our relationship with India. Together, our relations with the
nations of South Asia can serve as a foundation for deeper engagement throughout

National Security Strategy 39

Central Asia. Increasingly, Afghanistan will assume its historical role as a land-bridge
between South and Central Asia, connecting these two vital regions.

Central Asia is an enduring priority for our foreign policy. The five countries of Central
Asia are distinct from one another and our relations with each, while important, will
differ. In the region as a whole, the elements of our larger strategy meet, and we must
pursue those elements simultaneously: promoting effective democracies and the
expansion of free-market reforms, diversifying global sources of energy, and enhancing
security and winning the War on Terror.

7. East Asia

East Asia is a region of great opportunities and lingering tensions. Over the past decade,
it has been a source of extraordinary economic dynamism and also of economic
turbulence. Few regional economies have more effectively harnessed the engines of
future prosperity: technology and globalized trade. Yet few regions have had greater
difficulty overcoming the suspicions of the past.

The United States is a Paciﬁc nation, with extensive interests throughout East and
Southeast Asia. The region’s stability and prosperity depend on our sustained
engagement: maintaining robust partnerships supported by a forward defense posture
supporting economic integration through expanded trade and investment and promoting
democracy and human rights.

Forging new international initiatives and institutions can assist in the spread of freedom,
prosperity, and regional security. Existing institutions like the APEC forum and the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Regional Forum, can play a vital role.
New arrangements, such as the U.S.-ASEAN Enhanced Partnership, or others that are
focused on problem-solving and action, like the Six-Party Talks and the PSI, can likewise
bring together Asian nations to address common challenges. And Asian nations that
share our values can join us in partnership to strengthen new democracies and promote
democratic reforms throughout the region. This institutional framework, however, must
be built upon a foundation of sound bilateral relations with key states in the region.

With Japan, the United States enjoys the closest relations in a generation. As the world’s
two largest economies and aid donors, acting in concert multiplies each of our strengths
and magnifies our combined contributions to global progress. Our shared commitment to
democracy at home offers a sure foundation for cooperation abroad.

With Australia, our alliance is global in scope. From Iraq and Afghanistan to our historic
FTA, we are working jointly to ensure security, prosperity, and expanded liberty.

With the ROK, we share a vision of a prosperous, democratic, and united Korean
peninsula. We also share a commitment to democracy at home and progress abroad and
are translating that common vision into joint action to sustain our alliance into the

215‘ century.

40 National Security Strategy

With Southeast Asia, we celebrate the dynamism of increased economic freedom and
look to further extend political freedom to all the people in the region, including those
suffering under the repressive regime in Burma. In promoting greater economic and
political liberty, we will work closely with our allies and key friends, including
Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand.

China encapsulates Asia’s dramatic economic successes, but China’s transition remains
incomplete. In one generation, China has gone from poverty and isolation to growing
integration into the international economic system. China once opposed global
institutions; today it is a permanent member of the UNSC and the WTO. As China
becomes a global player, it must act as a responsible stakeholder that fulfills its
obligations and works with the United States and others to advance the international
system that has enabled its success: enforcing the international rules that have helped
China lift itself out of a century of economic deprivation, embracing the economic and
political standards that go along with that system of rules, and contributing to
international stability and security by working with the United States and other major
powers.

China’s leaders proclaim that they have made a decision to walk the transformative path
of peaceful development. If China keeps this commitment, the United States will
welcome the emergence of a China that is peaceful and prosperous and that cooperates
with us to address common challenges and mutual interests. China can make an
important contribution to global prosperity and ensure its own prosperity for the longer
term if it will rely more on domestic demand and less on global trade imbalances to drive
its economic growth. China shares our exposure to the challenges of globalization and
other transnational concerns. Mutual interests can guide our cooperation on issues such
as terrorism, proliferation, and energy security. We will work to increase our cooperation
to combat disease pandemics and reverse environmental degradation.

The United States encourages China to continue down the road of reform and openness,
because in this way China’s leaders can meet the legitimate needs and aspirations of the
Chinese people for liberty, stability, and prosperity. As economic growth continues,
China will face a growing demand from its own people to follow the path of East Asia’s
many modern democracies, adding political freedom to economic freedom. Continuing
along this path will contribute to regional and international security.

China’s leaders must realize, however, that they cannot stay on this peaceful path while
holding on to old ways of thinking and acting that exacerbate concerns throughout the
region and the world. These old ways include:

0 Continuing China’s military expansion in a non-transparent way;
0 Expanding trade, but acting as if they can somehow “lock up” energy supplies around

the world or seek to direct markets rather than opening them up — as if they can
follow a mercantilism borrowed from a discredited era; and

National Security Strategy 41

0 Supporting resource-rich countries without regard to the misrule at home or
misbehavior abroad of those regimes.

China and Taiwan must also resolve their differences peacefully, without coercion and
without unilateral action by either China or Taiwan.

Ultimately, China’s leaders must see that they cannot let their population increasingly
experience the freedoms to buy, sell, and produce, while denying them the rights to
assemble, speak, and worship. Only by allowing the Chinese people to enjoy these basic
freedoms and universal rights can China honor its own constitution and international
commitments and reach its full potential. Our strategy seeks to encourage China to make
the right strategic choices for its people, while we hedge against other possibilities.

42 National Security Strategy

IX.

Transform America’s National Securitv Institutions to Meet the Challenges and
Opportunities of the 21“ Century

A. Summary of National Security Strategy 2002

The major institutions of American national security were designed in a different era to
meet different challenges. They must be transformed.

B. Current Context: Successes and Challenges

In the last four years, we have made substantial progress in transforming key national
security institutions.

0 The establishment of the Department of Homeland Security brought under one
authority 22 federal entities with vital roles to play in protecting our Nation and
preventing terrorist attacks within the United States. The Department is focused on
three national security priorities: preventing terrorist attacks within the United States;
reducing America’s vulnerability to terrorism; and minimizing the damage and
facilitating the recovery from attacks that do occur.

0 In 2004, the Intelligence Community launched its most significant reorganization
since the 1947 National Security Act. The centerpiece is a new position, the Director
of National Intelligence, endowed with expanded budgetary, acquisition, tasking, and
personnel authorities to integrate more effectively the efforts of the Community into a
more unified, coordinated, and effective whole. The transformation also includes a
new National Counterterrorism Center and a new National Counterproliferation
Center to manage and coordinate planning and activities in those critical areas. The
transformation extends to the FBI, which has augmented its intelligence capabilities
and is now more fully and effectively integrated with the Intelligence Community.

0 The Department of Defense has completed the 2006 Quadrennial Defense Review,
which details how the Department will continue to adapt and build to meet new
challenges.

0 We are pursuing a future force that will provide tailored deterrence of both state
and non-state threats (including WMD employment, terrorist attacks in the
physical and information domains, and opportunistic aggression) while assuring
allies and dissuading potential competitors. The Department of Defense also is
expanding Special Operations Forces and investing in advanced conventional
capabilities to help win the long war against terrorist extremists and to help
dissuade any hostile military competitor from challenging the United States, its
allies, and partners.

0 The Department is transforming itself to better balance its capabilities across four
categories of challenges:

National Security Strategy 43

0 Traditional challenges posed by states employing conventional armies, navies,
and air forces in well-established forms of military competition.

0 Irregular challenges from state and non-state actors employing methods such as
terrorism and insurgency to counter our traditional military advantages, or
engaging in criminal activity such as piracy and drug trafficking that threaten
regional security.

0 Catastrophic challenges involving the acquisition, possession, and use of WMD
by state and non-state actors; and deadly pandemics and other natural disasters
that produce WMD-like effects.

0 Disruptive challenges from state and non-state actors who employ technologies
and capabilities (such as biotechnology, cyber and space operations, or directed-
energy weapons) in new ways to counter military advantages the United States
currently enjoys.

C. The Way Ahead

We must extend and enhance the transformation of key institutions, both domestically
and abroad.

At home, we will pursue three priorities:

0 Sustaining the transformation already under way in the Departments of
Defense, Homeland Security, and Justice; the Federal Bureau of Investigation;
and the Intelligence Community.

0 Continuing to reorient the Department of State towards transformational
diplomacy, which promotes effective democracy and responsible sovereignty.
Our diplomats must be able to step outside their traditional role to become more
involved with the challenges within other societies, helping them directly,
channeling assistance, and learning from their experience. This effort will
include:

0 Promoting the efforts of the new Director for Foreign
Assistance/Administrator to ensure that foreign assistance is used as
effectively as possible to meet our broad foreign policy objectives. This new
office will align more fully the foreign assistance activities carried out by the
Department of State and USAID, demonstrating that we are responsible
stewards of taxpayer dollars.

0 Improving our capability to plan for and respond to post-conﬂict and failed-
state situations. The Office of Reconstruction and Stabilization will integrate
all relevant United States Government resources and assets in conducting
reconstruction and stabilization operations. This effort must focus on building

44 National Security Strategy

the security and law enforcement structures that are often the prerequisite for
restoring order and ensuring success.

0 Developing a civilian reserve corps, analogous to the military reserves. The
civilian reserve corps would utilize, in a ﬂexible and timely manner, the
human resources of the American people for skills and capacities needed for
international disaster relief and post-conﬂict reconstruction.

0 Strengthening our public diplomacy, so that we advocate the policies and
values of the United States in a clear, accurate, and persuasive way to a
watching and listening world. This includes actively engaging foreign
audiences, expanding educational opportunities for Americans to learn about
foreign languages and cultures and for foreign students and scholars to study
in the United States; empowering the voices of our citizen ambassadors as
well as those foreigners who share our commitment to a safer, more
compassionate world; enlisting the support of the private sector; increasing
our channels for dialogue with Muslim leaders and citizens; and confronting
propaganda quickly, before myths and distortions have time to take root in the
hearts and minds of people across the world.

0 Improving the capacity of agencies to plan, prepare, coordinate, integrate,
and execute responses covering the full range of crisis contingencies and
long-term challenges.

0 We need to strengthen the capacity of departments and agencies to do
comprehensive, results-oriented planning.

0 Agencies that traditionally played only a domestic role increasingly have a
role to play in our foreign and security policies. This requires us to better
integrate interagency activity both at home and abroad.

Abroad, we will work with our allies on three priorities:
0 Promoting meaningful reform of the U.N., including:

0 Creating structures to ensure financial accountability and administrative
and organizational efficiency.

0 Enshrining the principle that membership and participation privileges are
earned by responsible behavior and by reasonable burden-sharing of
security and stability challenges.

0 Enhancing the capacity of the U.N. and associated regional organizations
to stand up well-trained, rapidly deployable, sustainable military and
gendarrne units for peace operations.

National Security Strategy 45

0 Ensuring that the U.N. reﬂects today’s geopolitical realities and is not shackled by
obsolete structures.

0 Reinvigorating the U.N.’s commitment, reﬂected in the U.N. Charter, to the
promotion of democracy and human rights.

0 Enhancing the role of democracies and democracy promotion throughout
international and multilateral institutions, including:

0 Strengthening and institutionalizing the Community of Democracies.

0 Fostering the creation of regional democracy-based institutions in Asia, the
Middle East, Africa, and elsewhere.

0 Improving the capacity of the U.N. and other multilateral institutions to advance
the freedom agenda through tools like the U.N. Democracy Fund.

0 Coordinating more effectively the unique contributions of international financial
institutions and regional development banks.

0 Establishing results-oriented partnerships on the model of the PSI to meet new
challenges and opportunities. These partnerships emphasize international
cooperation, not international bureaucracy. They rely on voluntary adherence rather
than binding treaties. They are oriented towards action and results rather than
legislation or rule-making.

46 National Security Strategy

Engage the Opportunities and Confront the Challenges of Globalization

In recent years, the world has witnessed the growing importance of a set of opportunities
and challenges that were addressed indirectly in National Security Strategy 2002: the
national security implications of globalization.

Globalization presents many opportunities. Much of the world’s prosperity and improved
living standards in recent years derive from the expansion of global trade, investment,
information, and technology. The United States has been a leader in promoting these
developments, and we believe they have improved significantly the quality of life of the
American people and people the world over. Other nations have embraced these
opportunities and have likewise benefited. Globalization has also helped the advance of
democracy by extending the marketplace of ideas and the ideals of liberty.

These new ﬂows of trade, investment, information, and technology are transforming
national security. Globalization has exposed us to new challenges and changed the way
old challenges touch our interests and values, while also greatly enhancing our capacity
to respond. Examples include:

0 Public health challenges like pandemics (HI V/AIDS, avian inﬂuenza) that
recognize no borders. The risks to social order are so great that traditional public
health approaches may be inadequate, necessitating new strategies and responses.

0 Illicit trade, whether in drugs, human beings, or sex, that exploits the modern era ’s
greater ease of transport and exchange. Such traffic corrodes social order; bolsters
crime and corruption; undermines effective governance; facilitates the illicit transfer
of WMD and advanced conventional weapons technology; and compromises
traditional security and law enforcement.

0 Environmental destruction, whether caused by human behavior or cataclysmic
mega-disasters such as ﬂoods, hurricanes, earthquakes, or tsunamis. Problems of
this scope may overwhelm the capacity of local authorities to respond, and may even
overtax national militaries, requiring a larger international response.

These challenges are not traditional national security concerns, such as the conﬂict of
arms or ideologies. But if left unaddressed they can threaten national security. We have
learned that:

0 Preparing for and managing these challenges requires the full exercise of national
power, up to and including traditional security instruments. For example, the U.S.
military provided critical logistical support in the response to the Southeast Asian
tsunami and the South Asian earthquake until U.N. and civilian humanitarian
responders could relieve the military of these vital duties.

0 Technology can help, but the key to rapid and effective response lies in achieving
unity of effort across a range of agencies. For example, our response to the Katrina

National Security Strategy 47

and Rita hurricanes underscored the need for communications systems that remain
operational and integrated during times of crisis. Even more vital, however, is
improved coordination within the Federal government, with state and local partners,
and with the private sector.

0 Existing international institutions have a role to play, but in many cases coalitions of
the willing may be able to respond more quickly and creatively, at least in the short
term. For example, U.S. leadership in mobilizing the Regional Core Group to
respond to the tsunami of 2004 galvanized the follow-on international response.

0 The response and the new partnerships it creates can sometimes serve as a catalyst for
changing existing political conditions to address other problems. For example, the
response to the tsunami in Southeast Asia and the earthquake in Pakistan developed
new lines of communication and cooperation at a local level, which opened the door
to progress in reconciling long-standing regional conﬂicts in Aceh and the Kashmir.

Effective democracies are better able to deal with these challenges than are repressive or
poorly governed states. Pandemics require robust and fully transparent public health
systems, which weak governments and those that fear freedom are unable or unwilling to
provide. Yet these challenges require effective democracies to come together in
innovative ways.

The United States must lead the effort to reform existing institutions and create new ones
— including forging new partnerships between governmental and nongovernmental actors,
and with transnational and international organizations.

To confront illicit trade, for example, the Administration launched the Proliferation
Security Initiative and the APEC Secure Trade in the APEC Region Initiative, both of
which focus on tangible steps governments can take to combat illegal trade.

To combat the cultivation and trafficking of narcotics, the Administration devotes over
$1 billion annually to comprehensive counternarcotics efforts, working with
governments, particularly in Latin America and Asia, to eradicate crops, destroy
production facilities, interdict shipments, and support developing alternative livelihoods.

To confront the threat of a possible pandemic, the Administration took the lead in
creating the International Partnership on Avian and Pandemic Inﬂuenza, a new global
partnership of states committed to effective surveillance and preparedness that will help
to detect and respond quickly to any outbreaks of the disease.

48 National Security Strategy

XI.

Conclusion

The challenges America faces are great, yet we have enormous power and
inﬂuence to address those challenges. The times require an ambitious national
security strategy, yet one recognizing the limits to what even a nation as powerful
as the United States can achieve by itself. Our national security strategy is
idealistic about goals, and realistic about means.

There was a time when two oceans seemed to provide protection from problems
in other lands, leaving America to lead by example alone. That time has long
since passed. America cannot know peace, security, and prosperity by retreating
from the world. America must lead by deed as well as by example. This is how
we plan to lead, and this is the legacy we will leave to those who follow.

National Security Strategy 49

