NA’.

TIONAL SECURI7

TY

STRATEGY

 

THE WHITE HOUSE

WASHINGTON

Time and again in our Nation’s history, Americans have risen to meet — and to shape —
moments of transition. This must be one of those moments. We live in a time of sweeping
change. The success of free nations, open markets, and social progress in recent decades has
accelerated globalization on an unprecedented scale. This has opened the doors of opportunity
around the globe, extended democracy to hundreds of millions of people, and made peace
possible among the major powers. Yet globalization has also intensiﬁed the dangers we face —
from international terrorism and the spread of deadly technologies, to economic upheaval and a
changing climate.

For nearly a decade, our Nation has been at war with a far-reaching network of violence and
hatred. Even as we end one war in Iraq, our military has been called upon to renew our focus on
Afghanistan as part of a commitment to disrupt, dismantle, and defeat al-Qa’ida and its afﬁliates.
This is part of a broad, multinational effort that is right and just, and we will be unwavering in
our commitment to the security of our people, allies, and partners. Moreover, as we face
multiple threats — from nations, nonstate actors, and failed states — we will maintain the
military superiority that has secured our country, and underpinned global security, for decades.

Yet as we ﬁght the wars in front of us, we must see the horizon beyond them — a world in which
America is stronger, more secure, and is able to overcome our challenges while appealing to the
aspirations of people around the world. To get there, we must pursue a strategy of national
renewal and global leadership ~— a strategy that rebuilds the foundation of American strength
and inﬂuence.

Our strategy starts by recognizing that our strength and inﬂuence abroad begins with the steps
we take at home. We must grow our economy and reduce our deﬁcit. We must educate our
children to compete in an age where knowledge is capital, and the marketplace is global. We
must develop the clean energy that can power new industry, unbind us from foreign oil, and
preserve our planet. We must pursue science and research that enables discovery, and unlocks
wonders as unforeseen to us today as the surface of the moon and the microchip were a century
ago. Simply put, we must see American innovation as a foundation of American power.

We must also build and integrate the capabilities that can advance our interests, and the interests
we share with other countries and peoples. Our Armed Forces will always be a cornerstone of
our security, but they must be complemented. Our security also depends upon diplomats who
can act in every corner of the world, from grand capitals to dangerous outposts; development

experts who can strengthen governance and support human dignity; and intelligence and law
enforcement that can unravel plots, strengthen justice systems, and work seamlessly with other
countries.

The burdens of a young century cannot fall on American shoulders alone — indeed, our
adversaries would like to see America sap our strength by overextending our power. In the past,
we have had the foresight to act judiciously and to avoid acting alone. We were part of the most
powerful wartime coalition in human history through World War II, and stitched together a
community of free nations and institutions to endure a Cold War. We are clear-eyed about the
challenge of mobilizing collective action, and the shortfalls of our international system. But
America has not succeeded by stepping outside the currents of international cooperation. We
have succeeded by steering those currents in the direction of liberty and justice — so that nations
thrive by meeting their responsibilities and face consequences when they don’t.

To do so, we will be steadfast in strengthening those old alliances that have served us so well,
while modernizing them to meet the challenges of a new century. As inﬂuence extends to more
countries and capitals, we will build new and deeper partnerships in every region, and strengthen
international standards and institutions. This engagement is no end in itself. The international
order we seek is one that can resolve the challenges of our times — countering violent extremism
and insurgency; stopping the spread of nuclear weapons and securing nuclear materials;
combating a changing climate and sustaining global growth; helping countries feed themselves
and care for their sick; resolving and preventing conﬂict, while also healing its wounds.

In all that we do, we will advocate for and advance the basic rights upon which our Nation was
founded, and which peoples of every race and region have made their own. We promote these
values by living them, including our commitment to the rule of law. We will strengthen
international norms that protect these rights, and create space and support for those who resist
repression. Our commitment to human dignity includes support for development, which is

why we will ﬁght poverty and corruption. And we reject the notion that lasting security and
prosperity can be found by turning away from universal rights — democracy does not merely
represent our better angels, it stands in opposition to aggression and injustice, and our support for
universal rights is both fundamental to American leadership and a source of our strength in the
world.

As a Nation made up of people from every race, region, faith, and culture, America will persist
in promoting peace among different peoples and believes that democracy and individual
empowerment need not come at the expense of cherished identities. Indeed, no nation should be
better positioned to lead in an era of globalization than America —~ the Nation that helped bring
globalization about, whose institutions are designed to prepare individuals to succeed in a
competitive world, and whose people trace their roots to every country on the face of the Earth.

As a citizen, Senator, and President, I have always believed that America’s greatest asset is its
people — from the awe I felt as a child watching a space capsule pulled out of the Paciﬁc, to the
strength I drew from workers rebuilding their lives in Illinois, to the respect that I have for the
generation of Americans who serve our country today. That is why I also believe that we must
foster even deeper connections among Americans and peoples around the globe. Our long-term

security will come not from our ability to instill fear in other peoples, but through our capacity to
speak to their hopes. And that work will best be done through the power of the decency and
dignity of the American people — our troops and diplomats, but also our private sector,
nongovernmental organizations, and citizens. All of us have a role to play.

From the birth of our liberty, America has had a faith in the future —— a belief that where we’re
going is better than where we’ve been, even when the path ahead is uncertain. To fulfill that
promise, generations of Americans have built upon the foundation of our forefathers ~—— ﬁnding
opportunity, ﬁghting injustice, and forging a more perfect Union. We have also created webs of
commerce, supported an international architecture of laws and institutions, and spilled American
blood in foreign lands —— not to build an empire, but to shape a world in which more individuals
and nations could determine their own destiny, and live with the peace and dignity that they
deserve.

In 2010, America is hardened by wars, andinspired by the servicemen and women who ﬁght
them. We are disciplined by a devastating economic crisis, and determined to see that its legacy
is a new foundation for prosperity; and we are bound by a creed that has guided us at home, and
served as a beacon to the world. America’s greatness is not assured —— each generation’s place
in history is a question unanswered. But even as we are tested by new challenges, the question
of our future is not one that will be answered for us, it is one that will be answered by us. And
in a young century whose trajectory is uncertain, America is ready to lead once more.

bile
Table of Contents

I. Overview of National Security Strategy .

ll. Strategic Approach

The Strategic Environment—The World as It Is .

The Strategic Approach—The World We Seek .
Building Our Foundation .
Pursuing Comprehensive Engagement.
Promoting a Just and Sustainable International Order .

Strengthening National Capacity—A Whole of GovernmentApproach .

Ill. Advancing Our Interests .
Security .
Strengthen Security and Resilience at Home.

Disrupt, Dismantle, and Defeat Al-Qa’ida and its Violent Extremist Afﬁliates in
Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Around the World .

Use ofForce.

Reverse the Spread of Nuclear and Biological Weapons and Secure Nuclear Materials
Advance Peace, Security, and Opportunity in the Greater Middle East.

Invest in the Capacity of Strong and Capable Partners .

Secure Cyberspace.

Prosperity .

Strengthen Education and Human Capital

Enhance Science, Technology, and Innovation .

Achieve Balanced and Sustainable Growth .

Accelerate Sustainable Development .

Spend Taxpayers’ Dollars Wisely.

_|

\O\O\l\l

ll
l2
l4

l7
l7
l8

19
22
23
24
26
27
28
29
30
31
33
34

Values.

Strengthen the Power ofOur Example .

Promote Democracy and Human Rights Abroad .

Promote Dignity by Meeting Basic Needs .
International Order.

Ensure Strong Alliances.

Build Cooperation with Other 21 st Century Centers of Inﬂuence.

Strengthen Institutions and Mechanisms for Cooperation .

Sustain Broad Cooperation on Key Global Challenges .

IV. Conclusion

35
36
37
39
40
41
43
46
47

51

Lalo

I. Overview of National Security Strategy

At the dawn of the 21 st century, the United States ofAmerica faces a broad and complex array of chal-
lenges to our national security. Just as America helped to determine the course ofthe 20th century,
we must now build the sources ofAmerican strength and inﬂuence, and shape an international order
capable of overcoming the challenges of the 21 st century.

The World as It Is, A Strategy for the World We Seek

To succeed, we must face the world as it is.The two decades since the end ofthe Cold War have been
marked by both the promise and perils ofchange.The circle of peaceful democracies has expanded; the
specter of nuclear war has lifted; major powers are at peace; the global economy has grown; commerce
has stitched the fate of nations together; and more individuals can determine theirown destiny. Yet these
advances have been accompanied by persistent problems. Wars over ideology have given way to wars
over religious, ethnic, and tribal identity; nuclear dangers have proliferated; inequality and economic
instability have intensiﬁed; damage to our environment, food insecurity, and dangers to public health
are increasingly shared; and the same tools that em power individuals to build enable them to destroy.

The dark side ofthis globalized world came to the forefront for the American people on September
11, 2001 .The immediate threat demonstrated by the deadliest attacks ever launched upon American
soil demanded strong and durable approaches to defend our homeland. In the years since, we have
launched a war against a|-Qa'ida and its afﬁliates, decided to ﬁght a war in Iraq, and confronted a sweep-
ing economic crisis. More broadly, though, we have wrestled with how to advance American interests in a
world that has changed—a world in which the international architecture ofthe 20th century is buckling
u nder the weight of new threats, the global economy has accelerated the competition facing our people
and businesses, and the universal aspiration for freedom and dignity contends with new obstacles.

Ourcountry possesses the attributes that have supported our leadership for decades—sturdy alliances,
an unmatched military, the world's largest economy, a strong and evolving democracy, and a dynamic
citizenry. Going forward, there should be no doubt: the United States of America will continue to
underwrite global security—through ourcommitments to allies, partners, and institutions; our focus on
defeating a|-Qa'ida and its afﬁliates in Afghanistan, Pakistan, and around the globe; and ourdetermina-
tion to deter aggression and prevent the proliferation of the world's most dangerous weapons. As we do,
we must recognize that no one nation—no matter how powerfu|—can meet global challenges alone.
As we did afterWor|d War II, America must prepare for the future, while forging cooperative approaches
among nations that can yield results.

Our national security strategy is, therefore, focused on renewing American leadership so that we can
more effectively advance our interests in the 21 st century. We will do so by building upon the sources
ofour strength at home, while shaping an international order that can meet the challenges of our
time.This strategy recognizes the fundamental connection between our national security, our national
competitiveness, resilience, and moral example. And it reafﬁrms America's commitment to pursue our
interests through an international system in which all nations have certain rights and responsibilities.

NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY

This will allow America to leverage our engagement abroad on behalf ofa world in which individuals
enjoy more freedom and opportunity, and nations have incentives to act responsibly, while facing
consequences when they do not.

Renewing American Leadership—Bui|ding at Home, Shaping Abroad

Our approach begins with a commitment to build a stronger foundation for American leadership,
because what takes place within our borders will determine our strength and inﬂuence beyond them.
This truth is only heightened in a world ofgreater interconnection—a world in which our prosperity is
inextricably linked to global prosperity,our security can be directly challenged by developments across
an ocean, and our actions are scrutinized as never before.

At the center of our efforts is a commitment to renew our economy, which serves as the wellspring of
American power. The American people are now emerging from the most devastating recession that we
have faced since the Great Depression. As we continue to act to ensure that our recovery is broad and
sustained, we are also laying the foundation for the long term growth of oureconomy and competitive-
ness of our citizens.The investments that we have made in recovery are a part of a broader effort that
will contribute to our strength: by providing a quality education for our children; enhancing science and
innovation; transforming our energy economy to power newjobs and industries; lowering the cost of
health care for our people and businesses; and reducing the Federal deﬁcit.

Each ofthese steps will sustain America's ability to lead in a world where economic power and individual
opportunity are more diffuse.These efforts are also tied to our commitment to secure a more resilient
nation. Our recovery includes rebuilding an infrastructure that will be more secure and reliable in the
face of terrorist threats and natural disasters. Our focus on education and science can ensure that the
breakthroughs oftomorrow take place in the United States. Ourdevelopment of new sources ofenergy
will reduce our dependence on foreign oil. Our commitment to deﬁcit reduction will discipline us to
make hard choices, and to avoid overreach.These steps complement our efforts to integrate homeland
security with national security; including seamless coordination among Federal, state, and local govern-
ments to prevent, protect against, and respond to threats and natural disasters.

Finally, the work to build a stronger foundation for our leadership within our borders recognizes that
the most effective way for the United States of America to promote our values is to live them. America's
commitment to democracy, human rights, and the rule of law are essential sources ofour strength and
inﬂuence in the wor|d.They too must be cultivated by our rejection ofactions like torture that are not in
line with ourvalues, by ourcommitment to pursuejustice consistent with our Constitution, and by our
steady determination to extend the promise ofAmerica to all ofour citizens. America has always been
a beacon to the peoples ofthe world when we ensure that the light ofAmerica’s example burns bright.

Building this stronger foundation will support America's efforts to shape an international system that
can meet the challenges of our time. In the aftermath of World War II, it was the United States that
helped take the lead in constructing a new international architecture to keep the peace and advance
prosperity—from NATO and the United Nations, to treaties that govern the laws and weapons of war;
from the World Bank and International Monetary Fund, to an expanding web oftrade agreements.This

I. OVERVIEW OF NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY

architecture, despite its ﬂaws, averted world war, enabled economic growth, and advanced human
rights, while facilitating effective burden sharing among the United States, our allies, and partners.

Today, we need to be clear-eyed about the strengths and shortcomings of international institutions that
were developed to deal with the challenges ofan earlier time and the shortage of political will that has
at times stymied the enforcement ofinternational norms. Yet it would be destructive to both American
national security and global security if the United States used the emergence of new challenges and
the shortcomings of the international system as a reason to walk away from it. Instead, we must focus
American engagement on strengthening international institutions and galvanizing the collective action
that can serve common interests such as combating violent extremism; stopping the spread of nuclear
weapons and securing nuclear materials; achieving balanced and sustainable economic growth; and
forging cooperative solutions to the threat ofclimate change, armed conﬂict, and pandemic disease.

The starting point for that collective action will be our engagement with other cou ntries.The cornerstone
of this engagement is the relationship between the United States and our close friends and allies in
Europe, Asia, the Americas, and the Middle East—ties which are rooted in shared interests and shared
values, and which serve our mutual security and the broader security and prosperity ofthe world. We are
working to build deeper and more effective partnerships with other key centers ofinﬂuence—inc|ud-
ing China, India, and Russia, as well as increasingly inﬂuential nations such as Brazil, South Africa, and
|ndonesia—so that we can cooperate on issues of bilateral and global concern, with the recognition
that power, in an interconnected world, is no longer a zero sum game. We are expanding our outreach
to emerging nations, particularly those that can be models of regional success and stability, from the
Americas to Africa to Southeast Asia. And we will pursue engagement with hostile nations to test their
intentions, give their governments the opportunity to change course, reach out to their people, and
mobilize international coalitions.

This engagement will underpin our commitment to an international order based upon rights and
responsibilities.Internationalinstitutions must more effectively represent the world of the 21 st century,
with a broader voice—and greater responsibi|ities—for emerging powers, and they must be modernized
to more effectively generate results on issues ofglobal interest. Constructive national steps on issues
ranging from nuclear security to climate change must be incentivized, so nations that choose to do
their part see the beneﬁts of responsible action. Rules of the road must be followed, and there must be
consequences for those nations that break the ru|es—whether they are nonproliferation obligations,
trade agreements, or human rights commitments.

This modernization of institutions, strengthening of international norms, and enforcement of inter-
national law is not a task for the United States a|one—but together with like-minded nations, it is a
task we can lead. A key source ofAmerican leadership throughout our history has been enlightened
self-interest. We want a better future for ourchildren and grandchildren, and we believe that their lives
will be better ifother peop|es’chi|dren and grandchildren can live in freedom and prosperity.The belief
that our own interests are bound to the interests of those beyond our borders will continue to guide
our engagement with nations and peoples.

NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY

Advancing Top National Security Priorities

Just as our national security strategy is focused on renewing our leadership for the long term, it is also
facilitating immediate action on top priorities. This Administration has no greater responsibility than
the safety and security of the American people. And there is no greater threat to the American people
than weapons of mass destruction, particularly the danger posed by the pursuit of nuclear weapons by
violent extremists and their proliferation to additional states.

That is why we are pursuing a comprehensive nonproliferation and nuclear security agenda, grounded
in the rights and responsibilities of nations. We are reducing our nuclear arsenal and reliance on nuclear
weapons, while ensuring the reliability and effectiveness of our deterrent. We are strengthening the
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (N PT) as the foundation of nonproliferation, while working through
the NPT to hold nations like Iran and North Korea accountable for their failure to meet international
obligations. We are leading a global effort to secure all vulnerable nuclear materials from terrorists.
And we are pursuing new strategies to protect against biological attacks and challenges to the cyber
networks that we depend upon.

As we secure the world's most dangerous weapons, we are ﬁghting a war against a fa r-reaching network
of hatred and violence. We will disrupt, dismantle, and defeat a|-Qa'ida and its afﬁliates through a com-
prehensive strategy that denies them safe haven, strengthens front-line partners, secures our homeland,
pursuesjustice through durable legal approaches, and counters a bankrupt agenda of extremism and
murder with an agenda of hope and opportunity.The frontline ofthis ﬁght is Afghanistan and Pakistan,
where we are applying relentless pressure on a|-Qa’ida, breaking theTa|iban’s momentum, and strength-
ening the security and capacity ofour partners. In this effort, our troops are again demonstrating their
extraordinary service, making great sacriﬁces in a time of danger, and they have our full support.

In Iraq, we are transitioning to full Iraqi sovereignty and responsibi|ity—a process that includes the
removal of our troops, the strengthening ofour civilian capacity, and a long-term partnership to the
Iraqi Government and people. We will be unwavering in our pursuit ofa comprehensive peace between
Israel and its neighbors, including a two-state solution that ensures Israel's security, while fulﬁlling the
Palestinian peop|es'|egitimate aspirations for a viable state oftheir own. And our broader engagement
with Muslim communities around the world will spur progress on critical political and security matters,
while advancing partnerships on a broad range ofissues based upon mutual interests and mutual
respect.

As we rebuild the economic strength upon which our leadership depends, we are working to advance
the balanced and sustainable growth upon which global prosperity and stability depends.This includes
steps at home and abroad to prevent another crisis. We have shifted focus to the G-20 as the premier
forum for international economic cooperation, and are working to rebalance global demand so that
America saves more and exports more, while emerging economies generate more demand. And we will
pursue bilateral and multilateral trade agreements that advance our shared prosperity, while accelerat-
ing investments in development that can narrow inequality, expand markets, and support individual
opportunity and state capacity abroad.

I. OVERVIEW OF NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY

These efforts to advance security and prosperity are enhanced by our support for certain values that are
universal. Nations that respect human rights and democratic values are more successful and stronger
partners, and individuals who enjoy such respect are more able to achieve their full potentia|.The United
States rejects the false choice between the narrow pursuit of our interests and an endless campaign
to impose our values. Instead, we see it as fundamental to our own interests to support a just peace
around the wor|d—one in which individuals, and notjust nations, are granted the fundamental rights
that they deserve.

In keeping with the focus on the foundation ofour strength and inﬂuence, we are promoting universal
values abroad by living them at home, and will not seek to impose these values through force. Instead,
we are working to strengthen international norms on behalf of human rights, while welcoming all
peaceful democratic movements. We are supporting the development of institutions within fragile
democracies, integrating human rights as a part ofourdialogue with repressive governments, and sup-
porting the spread of technologies that facilitate the freedom to access information. And we recognize
economic opportunity as a human right, and are promoting the dignity ofall men and women through
our support for global health, food security, and cooperatives responses to humanitarian crises.

Finally, ourefforts to shape an international order that promotes ajust peace must facilitate cooperation
capable of addressing the problems ofour time.This international order will support our interests, but
it is also an end that we seek in its own right. New challenges hold out the prospect ofopportunity, but
only if the international community breaks down the old habits of suspicion to build upon common
interests. A global effort to combat climate change must draw upon national actions to reduce emis-
sions and a commitment to mitigate their impact. Efforts to prevent conﬂicts and keep the peace in their
aftermath can stop insecurity from spreading. Global cooperation to prevent the spread of pandemic
disease can promote public health.

Implementing this agenda will not be easy.To succeed, we must balance and integrate all elements
ofAmerican power and update our national security capacity for the 21 st century. We must maintain
our mi|itary’s conventional superiority, while enhancing its capacity to defeat asymmetric threats. Our
diplomacy and development capabilities must be modernized, and our civilian expeditionary capac-
ity strengthened, to support the full breadth ofour priorities. Our intelligence and homeland security
efforts must be integrated with our national security policies, and those ofour allies and partners. And
our ability to synchronize our actions while communicating effectively with foreign publics must be
enhanced to sustain global support.

However, America's greatest asset remains our people. In an era that will be shaped by the ability to seize
the opportunities of a world that has grown more interconnected, it is the American people who will
make the difference—the troops and civilians serving within ourgovernment; businesses, foundations,
and educational institutions that operate around the globe; and citizens who possess the dynamism,
drive, and diversity to thrive in a world that has grown smaller. Because for all of its dangers, globalization
is in part a product ofAmerican leadership and the ingenuity of the American people. We are uniquely
suited to seize its promise.

NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY

Our story is not without imperfections. Yet at each juncture that history has called upon us to rise to
the occasion, we have advanced our own security, while contributing to the cause of human progress.
To continue to do so, our national security strategy must be informed by our people, enhanced by the
contributions ofthe Congress, and strengthened by the unity ofthe American people. lfwe draw on
that spirit anew, we can build a world ofgreater peace, prosperity, and human dignity.

Lalo

II. Strategic Approach

“More than at any point in human history—the interests of nations and peoples are
shared. The religious convictions that we hold in our hearts can forge new bonds among
people, or tear us apart. The technology We harness can light the path to peace, or forever
darken it. The energy We use can sustain our planet, or destroy it. What happens to the
hope of a single child—anywhere—can enrich our world, or impoverish it.”

—President Barack Obama, United Nations General Assembly, September 22, 2009

The United States must renew its leadership in the world by building and cultivating the sources ofour
strength and inﬂuence. Our national security depends upon America's ability to leverage our unique
national attributes,just as global security depends upon strong and responsible American leadership.
That includes our military might, economic competitiveness, moral leadership, global engagement,
and efforts to shape an international system that serves the mutual interests of nations and peoples.
For the world has changed at an extraordinary pace, and the United States must adapt to advance our
interests and sustain our leadership.

American interests are enduring.They are:
- The security of the United States, its citizens, and U.S. allies and partners;

- A strong, innovative, and growing U.S. economy in an open international economic system that
promotes opportunity and prosperity;

- Respect for universal values at home and around the world; and

- An international order advanced by U.S. leadership that promotes peace, security, and oppor-
tunity through stronger cooperation to meet global challenges.

Currently, the United States is focused on implementing a responsible transition as we end the war in
Iraq, succeeding in Afghanistan, and defeating a|-Qa’ida and its terrorist afﬁliates, while moving our
economy from catastrophic recession to lasting recovery. As we confront these crises, our national
strategy must take a longer view. We must build a stronger foundation for American leadership and
work to better shape the outcomes that are most fundamental to our people in the 21 st century.

The Strategic Environment—The World as It Is

In the two decades since the end of the Cold War, the free ﬂow of information, people, goods and services
has accelerated at an unprecedented rate.This interconnection has empowered individuals for good
and ill, and challenged state based international institutions that were largely designed in the wake of
World War II by policymakers who had different challenges in mind. Nonstate actors can have a dramatic
inﬂuence on the world around them. Economic growth has alleviated povertyand led to new centers of
inﬂuence. More nations are asserting themselves regionally and g|oba||y.The lives ofourcitizens—their
safety and prosperity—are more bound than ever to events beyond our borders.

NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY

Within this environment, the attacks of Septem ber 1 1, 2001, were a transformative event for the United
States, demonstratingjust how much trends far beyond our shores could directly endanger the personal
safety of the American people. The attacks put into sharp focus America's position as the sole global
superpower, the dangers ofviolent extremism, and the simmering conﬂicts that followed the peaceful
conclusion of the Cold War. And they drew a swift and forceful response from the United States and
our allies and partners in Afghanistan.This response was followed by our decision to go to war in Iraq,
and the ensuing years have seen America's forces, resources, and national security strategy focused on
these conﬂicts.

The United States is now ﬁghting two wars with many thousands ofour men and women deployed in
harm's way, and hundreds of billions of dollars dedicated to funding these conﬂicts. In Iraq, we are sup-
porting a transition of responsibility to the sovereign Iraqi Government. We are supporting the security
and prosperity ofour partners in Afghanistan and Pakistan as part of a broader campaign to disrupt,
dismantle, and defeat a|-Qa'ida and its violent extremist afﬁliates.

Yet these wars—and our global efforts to successfully counter violent extremism—are only one ele-
ment ofour strategic environment and cannot deﬁne America's engagement with the wor|d.Terrorism
is one of many threats that are more consequential in a global age. The gravest danger to the American
people and global security continues to come from weapons of mass destruction, particularly nuclear
weapons. The space and cyberspace capabilities that power our daily lives and military operations are
vulnerable to disruption and attack. Dependence upon fossil fuels constrains our options and pollutes
our environment. Climate change and pandemic disease threaten the security of regions and the health
and safety of the American people. Failing states breed conﬂict and endanger regional and global
security. Global criminal networks foment insecurity abroad and bring people and goods across our
own borders that threaten our people.

The global economy is being reshaped by innovation, emerging economies, transition to low-carbon
energy, and recovery from a catastrophic recession.The convergence of wealth and living standards
among developed and emerging economies holds out the promise of more balanced global growth, but
dramatic inequality persists within and among nations. Profound cultural and demographic tensions,
rising demand for resources, and rapid urbanization could reshape single countries and entire regions.
As the world grows more interconnected, more individuals are gaining awareness of their universal
rights and have the capacity to pursue them. Democracies that respect the rights of their people remain
successful states and America's most steadfast allies. Yet the advance of democracy and human rights
has stalled in many parts of the world.

More actors exert power and inﬂuence. Europe is now more united, free, and at peace than ever before.
The European Union has deepened its integration. Russia has reemerged in the international arena as a
strong voice. China and |ndia—the world's two most populous nations—are becoming more engaged
globally. From Latin America to Africa to the Paciﬁc, new and emerging powers hold out opportunities
for partnership, even as a handful of states endanger regional and global security by ﬂouting interna-
tional norms. International institutions play a critical role in facilitating cooperation, but at times cannot
effectively address new threats or seize new opportunities. Meanwhile, individuals, corporations, and
civil society play an increasingly important role in shaping events around the world.

II. STRATEGIC APPROACH

The United States retains the strengths that have enabled our leadership for many decades. Our society
is exceptional in its openness, vast diversity, resilience, and engaged citizenry. Our private sector and
civil society exhibit enormous ingenuity and innovation, and our workers are capable and dedicated.
We have the world's largest economy and most powerful military, strong alliances and a vibrant cultural
appeal, and a history of leadership in economic and social development. We continue to be a destination
that is sought out by immigrants from around the world, who enrich our society. We have a transparent,
accountable democracy and a dynamic and productive populace with deep connections to peoples
around the world. And we continue to embrace a set ofvalues that have enabled liberty and opportunity
at home and abroad.

Now, the very ﬂuidity within the international system that breeds new challenges must be approached
as an opportu nity to forge new international cooperation. We m ust rebalance our long-term priorities so
that we successfully move beyond today's wars, and focus ourattention and resources on a broader set
of cou ntries and challenges. We must seize on the opportunities afforded by the world's interconnection,
while responding effectively and comprehensively to its dangers. And we must take advantage of the
u nparalleled connections that America's Government, private sector, and citizens have around the globe.

The Strategic Approach—The World We Seek

In the past, the United States has thrived when both our nation and our national security policy have
adapted to shape change instead of being shaped by it. For instance, as the industrial revolution took
hold, America transformed our economy and our role in the world. When the world was confronted by
fascism, America prepared itselfto win a war and to shape the peace that followed. When the United
States encountered an ideological, economic, and military threat from communism, we shaped our
practices and institutions at home—and policies abroad—to meet this challenge. Now, we must once
again position the United States to champion mutual interests among nations and peoples.

Building Our Foundation

Our national security begins at home. What takes place within our borders has always been the source
of our strength, and this is even truer in an age ofinterconnection.

First and foremost, we must renew the foundation ofAmerica’s strength. In the long run, the welfare
of the American people will determine America's strength in the world, particularly at a time when our
own economy is inextricably linked to the global economy. Our prosperity serves as a wellspring for
our power. It pays for our military, underwrites our diplomacy and development efforts, and serves as
a leading source of our inﬂuence in the world. Moreover, our trade and investment supports millions
ofAmerican jobs, forges links among countries, spurs global development, and contributes to a stable
and peaceful political and economic environment.

Yet even as we have maintained our military advantage, our competitiveness has been set back in recent
years. We are recovering from underinvestment in the areas that are central to America's strength. We
have not adequately advanced priorities like education, energy, science and technology, and health
care—a|| of which are essential to U.S. competitiveness, long-term prosperity, and strength. Years of
rising ﬁscal and trade deﬁcits will also necessitate hard choices in the years ahead.

NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY

That is why we are rebuilding our economy so that it will serve as an engine of opportunity for the
American people, and a source ofAmerican inﬂuence abroad.The United States must ensure that we
have the world's best-educated workforce, a private sectorthat fosters innovation, and citizens and busi-
nesses that can access affordable health care to compete in a globalized economy. We must transform
the way that we use energy—diversifying supplies, investing in innovation, and deploying clean energy
technologies. By doing so, we will enhance energy security, create jobs, and ﬁght climate change.

Rebuilding our economy must include putting ourselves on a ﬁscally sustainable path. As such, imple-
menting our national security strategy will require a disciplined approach to setting priorities and mak-
ing tradeoffs among competing programs and activities. Taken together, these efforts will position our
nation for success in the global marketplace, while also supporting our national security capacity—the
strength ofour military, intelligence, diplomacy and development, and the security and resilience of
our homeland.

We are now moving beyond traditional distinctions between homeland and national security. National
security draws on the strength and resilience of ourcitizens, communities, and economy.This includes a
determination to prevent terrorist attacks against the American people by fully coordinating the actions
that we take abroad with the actions and precautions that we take at home. It must also include a com-
mitment to building a more secure and resilient nation, while maintaining open ﬂows of goods and
people. We will continue to develop the capacity to address the threats and hazards that confront us,
while redeveloping our infrastructure to secure our people and work cooperatively with other nations.

America's example is also a critical component ofour fou ndation.The human rights which America has
stood for since our founding have enabled our leadership, provided a source ofinspiration for peoples
around the world, and drawn a clear contrast between the United States and ourdemocratic allies, and
those nations and individuals that deny or suppress human rights. Our efforts to live our own values,
and uphold the principles ofdemocracy in ourown society, underpin our support for the aspirations of
the oppressed abroad, who know they can turn to America for leadership based onjustice and hope.

Our moral leadership is grounded principally in the power ofour examp|e—not through an effort to
impose our system on other peoples. Yet over the years, some methods employed in pursuit of our
security have compromised our ﬁdelity to the values that we promote, and our leadership on their
behalf. This undercuts our ability to support democratic movements abroad, challenge nations that
violate international human rights norms, and apply our broader leadership for good in the world.
That is why we will lead on behalf of our values by living them. Our struggle to stay true to our values
and Constitution has always been a lodestar, both to the American people and to those who share our
aspiration for human dignity.

Ourvalues have allowed us to draw the best and brightest to our shores, to inspire those who share our
cause abroad, and to give us the credibility to stand up to tyranny. America must demonstrate through
words and deeds the resilience of our values and Constitution. For if we compromise our values in pur-
suit of security, we will undermine both; if we fortify them, we will sustain a key source ofour strength
and leadership in the wor|d—one that sets us apart from our enemies and our potential competitors.

II. STRATEGIC APPROACH

Pursuing Comprehensive Engagement

Our foundation will support our efforts to engage nations, institutions, and peoples around the world
on the basis of mutual interests and mutual respect.

Engagement is the active participation ofthe United States in relationships beyond our borders. It is,
quite simply, the opposite of a self-imposed isolation that denies us the ability to shape outcomes.
Indeed, America has never succeeded through isolationism. As the nation that helped to build our
international system after World War II and to bring about the globalization that came with the end of
the Cold War, we must reengage the world on a comprehensive and sustained basis.

Engagement begins with our closest friends and a||ies—from Europe to Asia; from North America to
the Middle East.These nations share a common history of struggle on behalfof security, prosperity, and
democracy.They share common values and a common commitment to international norms that recog-
nize both the rights and responsibilities of all sovereign nations. America's national security depends on
these vibrant alliances, and we must engage them as active partners in addressing global and regional
security priorities and harnessing new opportunities to advance common interests. For instance, we
pursue close and regular collaboration with our close allies the United Kingdom, France, and Germany
on issues of mutual and global concern.

We will continue to deepen our cooperation with other 21 st century centers of inﬂ uence—inc|uding
China, India, and Russia—on the basis of mutual interests and mutual respect. We will also pursue
diplomacy and development that supports the emergence of new and successful partners, from the
Americas to Africa; from the Middle East to Southeast Asia. Ourability to advance constructive coopera-
tion is essential to the security and prosperity of speciﬁc regions, and to facilitating global cooperation on
issues ranging from violent extremism and nuclear proliferation, to climate change, and global economic
instabi|ity—issues that challenge all nations, but that no one nation alone can meet.

To adversarial governments, we offer a clear choice: abide by international norms, and achieve the
political and economic beneﬁts that come with greater integration with the international community;
or refuse to accept this pathway, and bear the consequences of that decision, including greater isolation.
Through engagement, we can create opportunities to resolve differences, strengthen the international
commu nity’s su pport for our actions, learn about the intentions and nature of closed regimes, and plainly
demonstrate to the publics within those nations that their governments are to blame for their isolation.

Successful engagement will depend upon the effective use and integration ofdifferent elements of
American power. Our diplomacy and development capabilities must help prevent conﬂict, spur eco-
nomic growth, strengthen weak and failing states, lift people out of poverty, com bat climate change
and epidemic disease, and strengthen institutions ofdemocratic governance. Our military will continue
strengthening its capacity to partner with foreign counterparts, train and assist security forces, and
pursue military-to-military ties with a broad range ofgovernments. We will continue to foster economic
and ﬁnancial transactions to advance our shared prosperity. And our intelligence and law enforcement
agencies must cooperate effectively with foreign governments to anticipate events, respond to crises,
and provide safety and security.

NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY

Finally, we will pursue engagement among peop|es—notjust governments—around the wor|d.The
United States Government will make a sustained effort to engage civil societyand citizens and facilitate
increased connections among the American people and peoples around the wor|d—through efforts
ranging from public service and educational exchanges, to increased commerce and private sector
partnerships. In many instances, these modes ofengagement have a powerful and enduring impact
beyond our borders, and are a cost-effective way of projecting a positive vision of American leadership.
Time and again, we have seen that the best ambassadors for American values and interests are the
American peop|e—our businesses, nongovernmental organizations, scientists, athletes, artists, military
service members, and students.

Facilitating increased international engagement outside of government will help prepare our country
to thrive in a global economy, while building the goodwill and relationships that are invaluable to sus-
taining American leadership. It also helps leverage strengths that are unique to America—ourdiversity
and diaspora populations, ouropenness and creativity, and the values that our people em body in their
own lives.

Promoting a Just and Sustainable International Order

Our engagement will underpin a just and sustainable international order—just, because it advances
mutual interests, protects the rights ofall, and holds accountable those who refuse to meet their
responsibilities; sustainable because it is based on broadly shared norms and fosters collective action
to address common challenges.

This engagement will pursue an international order that recognizes the rights and responsibilities ofall
nations. As we did afterWor|d War II, we must pursue a rules-based international system that can advance
our own interests by serving mutual interests. International institutions must be more effective and
representative ofthe diffusion ofinﬂ uence in the 21 st century. Nations must have incentives to behave
responsibly, or be isolated when they do not.The test of this international order must be the cooperation
it facilitates and the results it generates—the ability of nations to come together to confront common
challenges like violent extremism, nuclear proliferation, climate change, and a changing global economy.

That is precisely the reason we should strengthen enforcement of international law and our commit-
ment to engage and modernize international institutions and frameworks. Those nations that refuse
to meet their responsibilities will forsake the opportunities that come with international cooperation.
Credible and effective alternatives to military action—from sanctions to iso|ation—must be strong
enough to change behavior,just as we must reinforce our alliances and our military capabilities. And if
nations challenge or undermine an international order that is based upon rights and responsibilities,
they must ﬁnd themselves isolated.

We succeeded in the post-World War II era by pursuing our interests within multilateral forums like the
United Nations—not outside of them. We recognized that institutions that aggregated the national inter-
ests of many nations would never be perfect; but we also saw that they were an indispensable vehicle
for pooling international resources and enforcing international norms. Indeed, the basis for international

III. ADVANCING OUR INTERESTS

cooperation since World War II has been an architecture of international institutions, organizations,
regimes, and standards that establishes certain rights and responsibilities for all sovereign nations.

In recent years America's frustration with international institutions has led us at times to engage the
United Nations (U.N.) system on an ad hoc basis. But in a world oftransnational challenges, the United
States will need to invest in strengthening the international system, working from inside interna-
tional institutions and frameworks to face their imperfections head on and to mobilize transnational
cooperation.

We must be clear-eyed about the factors that have impeded effectiveness in the past. In order for collec-
tive action to be mobilized, the polarization that persists across region, race, and religion will need to be
replaced by a galvanizing sense of shared interest. Swift and effective international action often turns on
the political will ofcoalitions of countries that comprise regional or international institutions. New and
emerging powers who seek greater voice and representation will need to accept greater responsibility
for meeting global challenges. When nations breach agreed international norms, the countries who
espouse those norms must be convinced to band together to enforce them.

We will expand our support to modernizing institutions and arrangements such as the evolution ofthe
G-8 to the G-20 to reﬂect the realities of today's international environment. Working with the institutions
and the countries that comprise them, we will enhance international capacity to prevent conﬂict, spur
economic growth, improve security, combat climate change, and address the challenges posed by weak
and failing states. And we will challenge and assist international institutions and frameworks to reform
when they fail to live up to their promise. Strengthening the legitimacy and authority ofinternational
law and institutions, especially the U.N., will require a constant struggle to improve performance.

Furthermore, our international order must recognize the increasing inﬂuence of individuals in today's
wor|d.There must be opportunities for civil society to thrive within nations and to forge connections
among them. And there must be opportunities for individuals and the private sector to play a major role
in addressing common cha||enges—whether supporting a nuclear fuel bank, promoting global health,
fostering entrepreneurship, or exposing violations of universal rights. In the 21 st century, the ability of
individuals and nongovernment actors to play a positive role in shaping the international environment
represents a distinct opportunity for the United States.

Within this context, we know that an international order where every nation upholds its rights and
responsibilities will remain elusive. Force will sometimes be necessary to confront threats. Technology
will continue to bring with it new dangers. Poverty and disease will not be completely abolished.
Oppression will always be with us. But ifwe recognize these challenges, embrace America's responsibil-
ity to confront them with its partners, and forge new cooperative approaches to get others tojoin us
in overcoming them, then the international order ofa globalized age can better advance our interests
and the common interests of nations and peoples everywhere.

NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY

Strengthening National Capacity—A Whole of Government Approach

To succeed, we must update, balance, and integrate all of the tools of American power and work with our
allies and partners to do the same. Our military must maintain its conventional superiority and, as long as
nuclear weapons exist, our nuclear deterrent capability, while continuing to enhance its capacity to defeat
asymmetric threats, preserve access to the global commons, and strengthen partners. We must invest

in diplomacy and development capabilities and institutions in a way that complements and reinforces
our global partners. Our intelligence capabilities must continuously evolve to identify and characterize
conventional and asymmetric threats and provide timely insight. And we must integrate our approach to
homeland security with our broader national security approach.

We are improving the integration of skills and capabilities within our military and civilian institutions, so
they complement each other and operate seamlessly. We are also improving coordinated planning and
policyma king and must build our capacity in key areas where we fall short. This requires close coopera-
tion with Congress and a deliberate and inclusive interagency process, so that we achieve integration of
our efforts to implement and monitor operations, policies, and strategies.To initiate this effort, the White
House merged the staffs ofthe National Security Council and Homeland Security Council.

However, work remains to foster coordination across departments and agencies. Key steps include more
effectively ensuring alignment of resources with our national security strategy, adapting the education and
training of national security professionals to equip them to meet modern challenges, reviewing authorities
and mechanisms to implement and coordinate assistance programs, and other policies and programs that
strengthen coordination.

- Defense: We are strengthening our military to ensure that it can prevail in today's wars; to prevent and
deter threats against the United States, its interests, and our allies and partners; and prepare to defend
the United States in a wide range of contingencies against state and nonstate actors. We will continue to
rebalance our military capabilities to excel at counterterrorism, counterinsurgency, stability operations,
and meeting increasingly sophisticated security threats, while ensuring our force is ready to address
the full range of military operations.This includes preparing for increasingly sophisticated adversaries,
deterring and defeating aggression in anti—access environments, and defending the United States and
supporting civil authorities at home.The most valuable component of our national defense is the men
and women who make up America's a||—vo|unteer force.They have shown tremendous resilience, adapt-
ability, and capacity for innovation, and we will provide our service members with the resources that
they need to succeed and rededicate ourselves to providing support and care for wounded warriors,
veterans, and military families. We must set the force on a path to sustainable deployment cycles and
preserve and enhance the |ong—term viability of our force through successful recruitment, retention,
and recognition of those who serve.

- Diplomacy: Diplomacy is as fundamental to our national security as our defense capability. Our diplo-
mats are the ﬁrst line of engagement, listening to our partners, learning from them, building respect for
one another, and seeking common ground. Diplomats, development experts, and others in the United
States Government must be able to work side by side to support a common agenda. New skills are
needed to foster effective interaction to convene, connect, and mobilize not only other governments
and international organizations, but also nonstate actors such as corporations,foundations,nongovern-
mental organizations, universities, think tanks, and faith—based organizations, all of whom increasingly
have a distinct role to play on both diplomatic and development issues.To accomplish these goals our

TABLE OF CONTENTS

diplomatic personnel and missions must be expanded at home and abroad to support the increasingly
transnational nature of 21 st century security challenges. And we must provide the appropriate authori-
ties and mechanisms to implement and coordinate assistance programs and grow the civilian expedi-
tionary capacity required to assist governments on a diverse array of issues.

Economic: Our economic institutions are crucial components of our national capacity and our economic
instruments are the bedrock of sustainable national growth, prosperity and inﬂuence.The Ofﬁce of
Management and Budget, Departments of the Treasury, State, Commerce, Energy, and Agriculture,
United States Trade Representative, Federal Reserve Board, and other institutions help manage our
currency, trade, foreign investment, deﬁcit, inﬂation, productivity, and national competitiveness.
Remaining a vibrant 21 st century economic power also requires close cooperation between and
among developed nations and emerging markets because of the interdependent nature of the global
economy. America—|ike other nations—is dependent upon overseas markets to sell its exports and
maintain access to scarce commodities and resources.Thus, ﬁnding overlapping mutual economic
interests with other nations and maintaining those economic relationships are key elements of our
national security strategy.

Development: Development is a strategic, economic, and moral imperative. We are focusing on assist-
ing developing countries and their people to manage security threats, reap the beneﬁts of global
economic expansion, and set in place accountable and democratic institutions that serve basic human
needs.Through an aggressive and afﬁrmative development agenda and commensurate resources,

we can strengthen the regional partners we need to help us stop conﬂicts and counter global criminal
networks; build a stable, inclusive global economy with new sources of prosperity; advance democracy
and human rights; and ultimately position ourselves to better address key global challenges by growing
the ranks of prosperous, capable, and democratic states that can be our partners in the decades ahead.
To do this, we are expanding our civilian development capability; engaging with international ﬁnancial
institutions that leverage our resources and advance our objectives; pursuing a development budget
that more deliberately reﬂects our policies and our strategy, not sector earmarks; and ensuring that our
policy instruments are aligned in support of development objectives.

Homeland Security: Homeland security traces its roots to traditional and historic functions of govern-
ment and society, such as civil defense, emergency response, law enforcement, customs, border patrol,
and immigration. In the aftermath of 9/11 and the foundation of the Department of Homeland Security,
these functions have ta ken on new organization and urgency. Homeland security, therefore, strives to
adapt these traditional functions to confront new threats and evolving hazards. It is not simply about
government action alone, but rather about the collective strength of the entire country. Our approach
relies on our shared efforts to identify and interdict threats; deny hostile actors the ability to operate
within our borders; maintain effective control of our physical borders; safeguard lawful trade and travel
into and out of the United States; disrupt and dismantle transnational terrorist, and criminal organiza-
tions; and ensure our national resilience in the face of the threat and hazards.Ta ken together, these
efforts must support a homeland that is safe and secure from terrorism and other hazards and in which
American interests, aspirations, and way of life can thrive.

Intelligence: Our country's safety and prosperity depend on the quality of the intelligence we collect
and the analysis we produce, our ability to evaluate and share this information in a timely manner,

and our ability to counter intelligence threats.This is as true for the strategic intelligence that informs
executive decisions as it is for intelligence support to homeland security, state, Ioca I, and tribal govern-

NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY

ments, our troops, and critical national missions. We are working to better integrate the Intelligence
Community, while also enhancing the capabilities of our Intelligence Community members. We are
strengthening our partnerships with foreign intelligence services and sustaining strong ties with our
close allies. And we continue to invest in the men and women of the Intelligence Community.

Strategic Communications: Across all of our efforts, effective strategic communications are essential to
sustaining global legitimacy and supporting our policy aims. Aligning our actions with our words is a
shared responsibility that must be fostered by a culture of communication throughout government.
We must also be more effective in our deliberate communication and engagement and do a betterjob
understanding the attitudes, opinions, grievances, and concerns of peop|es—notjust e|ites—around
the world. Doing so allows us to convey credible, consistent messages and to develop effective plans,
while better understanding how our actions will be perceived. We must also use a broad range of meth-
ods for communicating with foreign publics, including new media.

The American People and the Private Sector:The ideas, values, energy, creativity, and resilience of our
citizens are America's greatest resource. We will support the development of prepared, vigilant, and
engaged communities and underscore that our citizens are the heart of a resilient country. And we
must tap the ingenuity outside government through strategic partnerships with the private sector,
nongovernmental organizations, foundations, and community—based organizations. Such partnerships
are critical to U.S. success at home and abroad, and we will support them through enhanced opportuni-
ties for engagement, coordination, transparency, and information sharing.

Lalo

III. Advancing Our Interests

To achieve the world we seek, the United States must apply our strategic approach in pursuit of four
enduring national interests:

- Security:The security of the United States, its citizens, and U.S. allies and partners.

- Prosperity: A strong, innovative, and growing U.S. economy in an open international economic
system that promotes opportunity and prosperity.

- Values: Respect for universal values at home and around the world.

- International Order: An international order advanced by U.S. leadership that promotes peace,
security, and opportunity through stronger cooperation to meet global challenges.

Each ofthese interests is inextricably linked to the others: no single interest can be pursued in isolation,
but at the same time, positive action in one area will help advance all four. The initiatives described
below do not encompass all of America's national security concerns. However, they represent areas of
particular priority and areas where progress is critical to securing our country and renewing American
leadership in the years to come.

Security

“We will not apologize for our way of life, nor will we waver in its defense. And for those
who seek to advance their aims by inducing terror and slaughtering innocents, we say to
you now that our spirit is stronger and cannot be broken—you cannot outlast us, and we
will defeat you.”

—President Barack Obama, Inaugural Address,]anuary 20, 2009

The threats to our people, our homeland, and our interests have shifted dramatically in the last 20 years.
Com petition among states endures, but instead of a single nuclear adversary, the United States is now
threatened by the potential spread of nuclear weapons to extremists who may not be deterred from
using them. Instead ofa hostile expansionist empire, we now face a diverse array of challenges, from
a loose network of violent extremists to states that ﬂout international norms or face internal collapse.
In addition to facing enemies on traditional battleﬁelds, the United States must now be prepared for
asymmetric threats, such as those that target our reliance on space and cyberspace.

This Administration has no greater responsibility than protecting the American people. Furthermore,
we embrace America's unique responsibility to promote international security—a responsibility that
ﬂows from our commitments to allies, our leading role in supporting ajust and sustainable international
order, and our unmatched military capabilities.

The United States remains the only nation able to project and sustain large-scale military operations
over extended distances. We maintain superior capabilities to deter and defeat adaptive enemies and

NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY

to ensure the credibility of security partnerships that are fundamental to regional and global security.
In this way, our military continues to underpin our national security and global leadership, and when
we use it appropriately, our security and leadership is reinforced. But when we overuse our military
might, or fail to invest in or deploy complementary tools, or act without partners, then our military is
overstretched, Americans bear a greater burden, and our leadership around the world is too narrowly
identiﬁed with military force. And we know that our enemies aim to overextend our Armed Forces and
to drive wedges between us and those who share our interests.

Therefore, we must continue to adapt and rebalance our instruments of statecraft. At home, we are inte-
grating our homeland security efforts seamlessly with other aspects ofour national security approach,
and strengthening our preparedness and resilience. Abroad, we are strengthening alliances, forging new
partnerships, and using every tool of American power to advance ourobjectives—inc|uding enhanced
diplomatic and development capabilities with the ability both to prevent conﬂict and to workalongside
our military. We are strengthening international norms to isolate governments that ﬂout them and to
marshal cooperation against nongovernmental actors who endanger our common security.

Strengthen Security and Resilience at Home

At home, the United States is pursuing a strategy capable of meeting the full range of threats and
hazards to our communities.These threats and hazards include terrorism, natural disasters, large-scale
cyber attacks, and pa ndemics. As we do everything within our power to prevent these dangers, we
also recognize that we will not be able to deter or prevent every single threat. That is why we must also
enhance our resi|ience—the ability to adapt to changing conditions and prepare for, withstand, and
rapidly recover from disruption.To keep Americans safe and secure at home, we are working to:

Enhance Security at Home: Security at home relies on our shared efforts to prevent and deter attacks
by identifying and interdicting threats, denying hostile actors the ability to operate within our borders,
protecting the nation's critical infrastructure and key resources, and securing cyberspace.That is why
we are pursuing initiatives to protect and reduce vulnerabilities in critical infrastructure, at our borders,
ports, and airports, and to enhance overall air, maritime, transportation, and space and cyber security.
Building on this foundation, we recognize that the global systems that carry people, goods, and data
around the globe also facilitate the movement of dangerous people, goods, and data. Within these
systems of transportation and transaction, there are key nodes—for example, points of origin and
transfer, or border crossings—that represent opportunities for exploitation and interdiction.Thus, we
are working with partners abroad to confront threats that often begin beyond our borders. And we are
developing lines of coordination at home across Federal, state, local, tribal, territorial, nongovernmental,
and private-sector partners, as well as individuals and communities.

Effectively Manage Emergencies: We are building our capability to prepare for disasters to reduce or
eliminate long-term effects to people and their property from hazards and to respond to and recover
from major incidents.To improve our preparedness, we are integrating domestic all hazards planning
at all levels of government and building key capabilities to respond to emergencies. We continue to
collaborate with communities to ensure preparedness efforts are integrated at all levels of government
with the private and nonproﬁt sectors. We are investing in operational capabilities and equipment, and

III. ADVANCING OUR INTERESTS

improving the reliability and interoperability of communications systems for ﬁrst responders. We are
encouraging domestic regional planning and integrated preparedness programs and will encourage
government at all levels to engage in long-term recovery planning. It is critical that we continually test
and improve plans using exercises that are realistic in scenario and consequences.

Empowering Communities to Counter Radicalization: Several recent incidences of violent extremists
in the United States who are committed to ﬁghting here and abroad have underscored the threat to
the United States and our interests posed by individuals radicalized at home. Our best defenses against
this threat are well informed and equipped families, local communities, and institutions. The Federal
Government will invest in intelligence to understand this threat and expand community engagement
and development programs to empower local communities. And the Federal Government, drawing
on the expertise and resources from all relevant agencies, will clearly communicate our policies and
intentions, listening to local concerns, tailoring policies to address regional concerns, and making clear
that our diversity is part of our strength—not a source ofdivision or insecurity.

Improve Resi|ienceThrough Increased Pu blic-Private Partnerships: When incidents occur, we must show
resilience by maintaining critical operations and functions, returning to our normal life, and learning
from disasters so that their lessons can be translated into pragmatic changes when necessary. The
private sector, which owns and operates most of the nation's critical infrastructure, plays a vital role in
preparing for and recovering from disasters. We must, therefore, strengthen public-private partnerships
by developing incentives for government and the private sector to design structures and systems that
can withstand disruptions and mitigate associated consequences, ensure redundant systems where
necessary to maintain the ability to operate, decentralize critical operations to reduce our vulnerability
to single points ofdisru ption, develop and test continuity plans to ensure the ability to restore critical
capabilities, and invest in improvements and maintenance of existing infrastructure.

Engage with Communities and Citizens: We will emphasize individual and community preparedness
and resilience through frequent engagement that provides clear and reliable risk and emergency
information to the public. A key part of this effort is providing practical steps that all Americans can
take to protect themselves, their families, and their neighbors.This includes transmitting information
through multiple pathways and to those with special needs. In addition, we support efforts to develop
a nationwide public safety broadband network. Our efforts to inform and empower Americans and their
communities recognize that resilience has always been at the heart of the American spirit.

Disrupt, Dismantle, and Defeat AI-Qa'ida and its Violent Extremist Afﬁliates in
Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Around the World

The United States is waging a global campaign against a|-Qa'ida and its terrorist afﬁliates. To disru pt,
dismantle and defeat a|-Qa'ida and its afﬁliates, we are pursuing a strategy that protects our homeland,
secures the world's most dangerous weapons and material, denies a|-Qa’ida safe haven, and builds
positive partnerships with Muslim communities around the world. Success requires a broad, sustained,
and integrated campaign thatjudiciously applies every tool of American power—both military and
civi|ian—as well as the concerted efforts of like-minded states and multilateral institutions.

NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY

We will always seek to delegitimize the use of terrorism and to isolate those who carry it out. Yet this is
not a global war against a tactic—terrorism or a re|igion—|s|am. We are at war with a speciﬁc network,
a|-Qa’ida, and its terrorist afﬁliates who support efforts to attack the United States, our allies, and partners.

Prevent Attacks on and in the Home|and:To prevent acts ofterrorism on American soil, we must enlist
all ofour intelligence, law enforcement, and homeland security capabilities. We will continue to inte-
grate and leverage state and major urban area fusion centers that have the capability to share classiﬁed
information; establish a nationwide framework for reporting suspicious activity; and implement an
integrated approach to our counterterrorism information systems to ensure that the analysts, agents,
and ofﬁcers who protect us have access to all relevant intelligence throughout the government. We
are improving information sharing and cooperation by linking networks to facilitate Federal, state, and
local capabilities to seamlessly exchange messages and information, conduct searches, and collaborate.
We are coordinating better with foreign partners to identify, track, limit access to funding, and prevent
terrorist travel. Recognizing the inextricable link between domestic and transnational security, we will
collaborate bilaterally, regionally, and through international institutions to promote global efforts to
prevent terrorist attacks.

Strengthen Aviation Security: We know that the aviation system has been a particular target of a|-Qa’ida
and its afﬁ|iates.We must continue to bolster aviation security worldwide through a focus on increased
information collection and sharing, stronger passenger vetting and screening measures, the develop-
ment and development of advanced screening technologies, and cooperation with the international
community to strengthen aviation security standards and efforts around the world.

DenyTerrorists Weapons of Mass Destruction:To prevent acts of terrorism with the world's most danger-
ous weapons, we are dramatically accelerating and intensifying efforts to secure all vulnerable nuclear
materials by the end of 201 3, and to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons. We will also take actions
to safeguard knowledge and capabilities in the life and chemical sciences that could be vulnerable to
misuse.

Deny Al-Qa’ida the Ability to Threaten the American People, Our Allies, Our Partners and Our Interests
Overseas: Al-Qa’ida and its allies must not be permitted to gain or retain any capacity to plan and launch
international terrorist attacks, especially against the U.S. homeland. Al Qa’ida’s core in Pakistan remains
the most dangerous component of the larger network, but we also face a growing threat from the
grou p’s allies worldwide. We must deny these groups the ability to conduct operational plotting from
any locale, or to recruit, train, and position operatives, including those from Europe and North America.

Afghanistan and Pakistan: This is the epicenter of the violent extremism practiced by al Qa'ida. The
danger from this region will onlygrow ifits security slides backward, theTa|iban controls large swaths of
Afghanistan, and a|-Qa'ida is allowed to operate with impunity.To prevent future attacks on the United
States, ourallies, and partners, we must work with others to keep the pressure on a|-Qa’ida and increase
the security and capacity of our partners in this region.

In Afghanistan, we must deny a|-Qa'ida a safe haven, deny the Taliban the ability to overthrow the gov-
ernment, and strengthen the capacity of Afghanistan's security forces and government so that they can
take lead responsibility for Afghanistan's future. Within Pakistan, we are working with the government
to address the local, regional, and global threat from violent extremists.

20

III. ADVANCING OUR INTERESTS

We will achieve these objectives with a strategy comprised of three components.

- First, our military and International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) partners within Afghanistan
are targeting the insurgency, working to secure key population centers, and increasing efforts
to train Afghan security forces.These military resources will allow us to create the conditions to
transition to Afghan responsibility. In July 2011, we will begin reducing our troops responsibly,
ta king into account conditions on the grou nd. We will continue to advise and assist Afg hanista n’s
Security Forces so that they can succeed over the long term.

- Second, we will continue to work with our partners, the United Nations, and the Afghan
Government to improve accountable and effective governance. As we work to advance our
strategic partnership with the Afghan Government, we are focusing assistance on supporting
the President of Afghanistan and those ministries, governors, and local leaders who combat
corruption and deliver for the people. Ourefforts will be based upon performance, and we will
measure progress. We will also target our assistance to areas that can make an immediate and
enduring impact in the lives of the Afghan people, such as agriculture, while supporting the
human rights ofall ofAfghanistan’s peop|e—women and men.This will support our long-term
commitment to a relationship between our two countries that supports a strong, stable, and
prosperous Afghanistan.

- Third, we will foster a relationship with Pakistan founded upon mutual interests and mutual
respect. To defeat violent extremists who threaten both of our countries, we will strengthen
Pakista n’s capacity to target violent extremists within its borders, and continue to provide
security assistance to support those efforts.To strengthen Pakistan's democracy and develop-
ment, we will provide substantial assistance responsive to the needs of the Pakistani people,
and sustain a long-term partnership committed to Pakistan's future. The strategic partnership
that we are developing with Pakistan includes deepening cooperation in a broad range of
areas, addressing both security and civilian challenges, and we will continue to expand those
ties through our engagement with Pakistan in the years to come.

Deny Safe Havens and Strengthen At-Risk States: Wherever a|-Qa’ida or its terrorist afﬁliates attempt
to establish a safe haven—as they have in Yemen, Somalia, the Maghreb, and the Sahe|—we will meet
them with growing pressure. We also will strengthen ourown network of partners to disable al-Qa’ida’s
ﬁnancial, human, and planning networks; disrupt terrorist operations before they mature; and address
potential safe-havens before a|-Qa'ida and its terrorist afﬁliates can take root. These efforts will focus on
information-sharing, law enforcement cooperation, and establishing new practices to cou nter evolving
adversaries. We will also help states avoid becoming terrorist safe havens by helping them build their
capacity for responsible governance and security through development and security sector assistance.

Deliver Swift and Sure Justice: To effectively detain, interrogate, and prosecute terrorists, we need
durable legal approaches consistent with our security and our values. We adhere to several principles:
we will leverage all available information and intelligence to disrupt attacks and dismantle a|-Qa'ida and
afﬁliated terrorist organizations; we will bring terrorists tojustice; we will act in line with the rule of law
and due process; we will submit decisions to checks and balances and accountability; and we will insist
that matters of detention and secrecy are addressed in a manner consistent with our Constitution and

21

NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY

laws. To deny violent extremists one of their most potent recruitment tools, we will close the prison at
Guantanamo Bay.

Resist Fear and Overreaction:The goal of those who perpetrate terrorist attacks is in part to sow fear. If we
respond with fear, we allow violent extremists to succeed far beyond the initial impact of their attacks, or
attempted attacks—a|tering our societyand enlarging the standing of a|-Qa'ida and its terrorist afﬁliates
far beyond its actual reach. Similarly, overreacting in a way that creates ﬁssures between America and
certain regions or religions will undercut our leadership and make us less safe.

Contrast Al-Qa’ida’s Intent to Destroy with Our Constructive Vision: While violent extremists seek to
destroy, we will make clear our intent to bui|d.We are striving to build bridges among people ofdifferent
faiths and regions. We will continue to work to resolve the Arab-Israeli conﬂict, which has long been a
source oftension. We will continue to stand up for the universal rights ofall people, even for those with
whom we disagree. We are developing new partnerships in Muslim communities around the world on
behalfof health, education, science, employment, and innovation. And through our broader emphasis
on Muslim engagement, we will communicate our commitment to support the aspirations ofall people
for security and opportunity. Finally, we reject the notion that a|-Qa’ida represents any religious author-
ity. They are not religious leaders, they are killers; and neither Islam nor any other religion condones the
slaughter of innocents.

Use of Force

Military force, at times, may be necessary to defend our country and allies or to preserve broader peace
and security, including by protecting civilians facing a grave humanitarian crisis.We will draw on diplo-
macy, development, and international norms and institutions to help resolve disagreements, prevent
conﬂict, and maintain peace, mitigating where possible the need for the use of force.This means credibly
underwriting U.S. defense commitments with tailored approaches to deterrence and ensuring the U.S.
military continues to have the necessary capabilities across all domains—|and, air, sea, space, and cyber. It
also includes helping our allies and partners build capacity to fulﬁll their responsibilities to contribute to
regional and global security.

While the use of force is sometimes necessary, we will exhaust other options before war whenever we can,
and carefully weigh the costs and risks of action against the costs and risks of inaction. When force is neces-
sary, we will continue to do so in a way that reﬂects our values and strengthens our legitimacy, and we will
seek broad international support, working with such institutions as NATO and the U.N. Security Council.

The United States must reserve the right to act unilaterally if necessary to defend our nation and our inter-
ests, yet we will also seek to adhere to standards that govern the use of force. Doing so strengthens those
who act in line with international standards, while isolating and weakening those who do not. We will also
outline a clear mandate and speciﬁc objectives and thoroughly consider the consequences —intended
and unintended—of our actions. And the United States will take care when sending the men and women
of our Armed Forces into harm's way to ensure they have the leadership, training, and equipment they
require to accomplish their mission.

22

III. ADVANCING OUR INTERESTS

Reverse the Spread of Nuclear and Biological Weapons and Secure Nuclear
Materials

The American people face no greater or more urgent danger than a terrorist attack with a nuclear
weapon. And international peace and security is threatened by proliferation that could lead to a nuclear
exchange. Indeed, since the end of the Cold War, the risk of a nuclear attack has increased. Excessive
Cold War stockpiles remain. More nations have acquired nuc|earweapons.Testing has continued. Black
markets trade in nuclear secrets and materia|s.Terrorists are determined to buy, build, or steal a nuclear
weapon. Our efforts to contain these dangers are centered in a global nonproliferation regime that has
frayed as more people and nations breakthe rules.

That is why reversing the spread of nuclear weapons is a top priority. Success depends upon broad
consensus and concerted action, we will move forward strategically on a number offronts through our
example, our partnerships, and a reinvigorated international regime.The United States will:

Pursue the Goal ofa World Without Nuclear Weapons: While this goal will not be reached during this
Administration, its active pursuit and eventual achievement will increase global security, keep our
commitment underthe NPT, build ourcooperation with Russia and other states, and increase our cred-
ibility to hold others accountable for their obligations. As long as any nuclear weapons exist, the United
States will sustain a safe, secure, and effective nuclear arsenal, both to deter potential adversaries and
to assure U.S. allies and other security partners that they can count on America's security commitments.
But we have signed and seek to ratifya landmark New STARTTreaty with Russia to substantially limit our
deployed nuclear warheads and strategic delivery vehicles, while assuring a comprehensive monitoring
regime. We are reducing the role of nuclear weapons in our national security approach, extending a
negative security assurance not to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against those nonnuclear
nations that are in compliance with the NPTand their nuclear nonproliferation obligations, and investing
in the modernization of a safe, secure, and effective stockpile without the production of new nuclear
weapons. We will pursue ratiﬁcation of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty. And we will seek a new treaty
that veriﬁably ends the production ofﬁssile materials intended for use in nuclear weapons.

Strengthen the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty: The basic bargain of the NPT is sound: countries with
nuclear weapons will move toward disarmament; countries without nuclear weapons will forsake
them; and all countries can access peaceful nuclear energy.To strengthen the NPT, we will seek more
resources and authority for international inspections. We will develop a new framework for civil nuclear
cooperation. As members ofthe Global Nuclear Energy Partnership have agreed, one important ele-
ment ofan enhanced framework could be cradle-to-grave nuclear fuel management. We will pursue a
broad, international consensus to insist that all nations meet their obligations. And we will also pursue
meaningful consequences for countries that fail to meet their obligations under the NPT or to meet the
requirements for withdrawing from it.

Present a Clear Choice to Iran and North Korea:The United States will pursue the denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula and work to prevent Iran from developing a nuclear weapon.This is not about singling
out nations—it is about the responsibilities ofall nations and the success ofthe nonproliferation regime.
Both nations face a clear choice. If North Korea eliminates its nuclear weapons program, and Iran meets
its international obligations on its nuclear program, they will be able to proceed on a path to greater

23

NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY

political and economic integration with the international community. lfthey ignore their international
obligations, we will pursue multiple means to increase their isolation and bring them into compliance
with international nonproliferation norms.

SecureVu|nerab|e Nuc|earWeapons and Materia|:The Global Nuclear Security Summit of 201 O rallied 47
nations behind the goal of securing all nuclear materials from terrorist groups. By the end of 201 3, we
will seek to complete a focused international effort to secure all vulnerable nuclear material around the
world through enhanced protection and accounting practices, expanded cooperation with and through
international institutions, and new partnerships to lock down these sensitive materials. To detect and
intercept nuclear materials in transit, and to stop the illicit trade in these technologies, we will work to
turn programs such as the Proliferation Security Initiative and the Global Initiative to Com bat Nuclear
Terrorism into durable international efforts. And we will sustain broad-based cooperation with other
nations and international institutions to ensure the continued improvements necessary to protect
nuclear materials from evolving threats.

Support Peaceful Nuclear Energy: As countries move increasingly to tap peaceful nuclear energy to
provide power generation while advancing climate goals, the world must develop an infrastructure
in the countries that seek to use nuclear energy for their energy security needs and climate goals to
ensure that nuclear energy is developed in a safer manner. We will do so by promoting safety through
regulatory bodies and training of operators, promoting physical security to prevent terrorist acts, and
assuring safe and secure handling of fuel at the front and back ends of the nuclear fuel cycle.

Counter Biological Threats: The effective dissemination ofa lethal biological agent within a population
center would endanger the lives of hundreds of thousands of people and have unprecedented eco-
nomic, societal, and political consequences. We must continue to work at home with ﬁrst responders
and health ofﬁcials to reduce the risk associated with unintentional or deliberate outbreaks of infectious
disease and to strengthen our resilience across the spectrum of high-consequence biological threats.
We will work with domestic and international partners to protect against biological threats by promot-
ing global health security and reinforcing norms of safe and responsible conduct; obtaining timely
and accurate insight on current and emerging risks; taking reasonable steps to reduce the potential
for exploitation; expanding our capability to prevent, attribute, and apprehend those who carry out
attacks; communicating effectively with all stakeholders; and helping to transform the international
dialogue on biological threats.

Advance Peace, Security, and Opportunity in the Greater Middle East

The United States has important interests in the greater Middle East.They include broad cooperation on
a wide range ofissues with our close friend, Israel, and an unshakable commitment to its security; the
achievement ofthe Palestinian people's legitimate aspirations for statehood, opportu nity, and the real-
ization of their extraordinary potential; the unity and security oflraq and the fostering of its democracy
and reintegration into the region; the transformation of Iranian policy away from its pursuit of nuclear
weapons, support for terrorism, and threats against its neighbors; nonproliferation; and cou nterterrorism
cooperation, access to energy, and integration of the region into global markets.

24

III. ADVANCING OUR INTERESTS

At the same time, our engagement must be both comprehensive and strategic. It should extend beyond
near-term threats by appealing to peop|es'aspirations forjustice, education, and opportunity and by
pursuing a positive and sustainable vision of U.S. partnership with the region. Furthermore, our relation-
ship with our Israeli and Arab friends and partners in the region extends beyond our commitment to its
security and includes the continued ties we share in areas such as trade, exchanges, and cooperation
on a broad range ofissues.

Complete a Responsible Transition as We End the War in |raq:The war in Iraq presents a distinct and
important challenge to the United States, the international community, the Iraqi people, and the region.
America's servicemen and women, along with our coalition partners, have performed remarkably in
ﬁghting determined enemies and have worked with our civilians to help the Iraqi people regain control
of their own destiny. Going forward, we have a responsibility, for our own security and the security of
the region, to successfully end the war through a full transition to Iraqi responsibility. We will cultivate
an enduring relationship with Iraq based on mutual interests and mutual respect.

Our goal is an Iraq that is sovereign, stable, and self-re|iant.To achieve that goal, we are continuing to
promote an Iraqi Government that isjust, representative, and accountable and that denies support and
safe haven to terrorists. The United States will pursue no claim on Iraqi territory or resources, and we
will keep our commitments to Iraq's democratically elected government.These efforts will build new
ties of trade and commerce between Iraq and the world, enable Iraq to assume its rightful place in the
community of nations, and contribute to the peace and security ofthe region.

We are pursuing these objectives with a strategy that has three core components.

- Transition Security: First, we are transitioning security to full Iraqi responsibility. We will end the
com bat mission in Iraq by the end of August 201 0. We will continue to train, equip, and advise
Iraqi Security Forces; conduct targeted counterterrorism missions; and protect ongoing civilian
and military efforts in Iraq. And, consistent with our commitments to the Iraqi Government,
including the U.S.-Iraq Security Agreement, we will remove all of our troops from Iraq by the
end of 201 1.

- Civilian Support: Second, as the security situation continues to improve, U.S. civilian engage-
ment will deepen and broaden. We will sustain a capable political, diplomatic, and civilian effort
to help the Iraqi people as they resolve outstanding differences, integrate those refugees and
displaced persons who can return, and continue to develop accountable democratic institu-
tions that can better serve their basic needs. We will work with our Iraqi partners to implement
the Strategic Framework Agreement, with the Department of State taking the lead. This will
include cooperation on a range of issues including defense and security cooperation, political
and diplomatic cooperation, rule of law, science, health, education, and economics.

- Regional Diplomacy and Development: Third, we will continue to pursue comprehensive
engagement across the region to ensure that our drawdown in Iraq provides an opportunity
to advance lasting security and sustainable development for both Iraq and the broader Middle
East. The United States will continue to retain a robust civilian presence commensurate with
our strategic interests in the country and the region. We are transforming our relationship to
one consistent with other strategic partners in the region.

25

NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY

Pursue Arab-Israeli Peace: The United States, Israel, the Palestinians, and the Arab States have an interest
in a peaceful resolution of the Arab-Israeli conﬂict—one in which the legitimate aspirations of Israelis
and Palestinians for securityand dignity are realized, and Israel achieves a secure and lasting peace with
all ofits neighbors.

The United States seeks two states living side by side in peace and security—a Jewish state of Israel, with
true security, acceptance, and rights for all Israelis; and a viable, independent Palestine with contiguous
territory that ends the occu pation that began in 1967 and realizes the potential of the Palestinian people.
We will continue to work regionally and with like-minded partners in order to advance negotiations
that address the permanent-status issues: security for Israelis and Palestinians; borders, refugees, and
Jerusalem. We also seek international support to build the institutions upon which a Palestinian state
will depend, while supporting economic development that can bring opportunity to its people.

Any Arab-Israeli peace will only be lasting if harmful regional interference ends and constructive regional
support deepens. As we pursue peace between Israelis and Palestinians, we will also pursue peace
between Israel and Lebanon, Israel and Syria, and a broader peace between Israel and its neighbors.We
will pursue regional initiatives with multilateral participation, alongside bilateral negotiations.

Promote a Responsible Iran: For decades, the Islamic Republic of Iran has endangered the security of
the region and the United States and failed to live up to its international responsibilities. In addition
to its illicit nuclear program, it continues to support terrorism, undermine peace between Israelis and
Palestinians, and deny its people their universal rights. Many years of refusing to engage Iran failed to
reverse these trends; on the contrary, Iran's behavior became more threatening. Engagement is some-
thing we pursue without illusion. It can offer Iran a pathway to a better future, provided Iran's leaders
are prepared to take it. But that better pathway can only be achieved if Iran's leaders change course,
act to restore the conﬁdence of the international community, and fulﬁll their obligations. The United
States seeks a future in which Iran meets its international responsibilities, takes its rightful place in the
community of nations, and enjoys the political and economic opportunities that its people deserve.
Yet if the Iranian Government continues to refuse to live up to its international obligations, it will face
greater isolation.

Invest in the Capacity of Strong and Capable Partners

Where governments are incapable of meeting their citizens’ basic needs and fulﬁlling their responsibili-
ties to provide security within their borders, the consequences are often global and may directly threaten
the American people. To advance our common security, we must address the underlying political and
economic deﬁcits that foster instability, enable radicalization and extremism, and ultimately undermine
the ability ofgovernments to manage threats within their borders and to be our partners in addressing
common challenges. To invest in the capacity of strong and capable partners, we will work to:

Foster Security and Reconstruction in the Aftermath of Conﬂict: The United States and the international
comm unity cannot shy away from the difﬁcu It task of pursuing stabilization in conﬂict and post-conﬂict
environments. In countries like Iraq and Afghanistan, building the capacity necessary for security, eco-
nomic growth, and good governance is the only path to long term peace and security. But we have also
learned that the effectiveness of these efforts is profoundly affected by the capacity of governments and

26

III. ADVANCING OUR INTERESTS

the political will of their leaders. We will take these constraints into account in designing appropriate
assistance strategies and will facilitate the kind of collaboration that is essentia|—within our govern-
ment and with international organizations—in those instances when we engage in the difﬁcult work
of helping to bring conﬂicts to an end.

Pursue Sustainable and Responsible Security Systems in At-Risk States: Proactively investing in stronger
societies and human welfare is far more effective and efﬁcient than responding after state collapse.
The United States must improve its capability to strengthen the security of states at risk of conﬂict and
violence. We will undertake long-term, sustained efforts to strengthen the capacity of security forces to
guarantee internal secu rity, defend against external threats, and promote regional security and respect
for hu man rights and the rule of law. We will also continue to strengthen the administrative and oversight
capability of civilian security sector institutions, and the effectiveness of criminal justice.

Prevent the Emergence of Conﬂict: Our strategy goes beyond meeting the challenges of today, and
includes preventing the challenges and seizing the opportunities of tomorrow. This requires investing
now in the capable partners ofthe future; building today the capacity to strengthen the foundations of
our common security, and modernizing our capabilities in order to ensure that we are agile in the face
ofchange. We have already begun to reorient and strengthen our development agenda; to take stock
ofand enhance ourcapabilities; and to forge new and more effective means ofapplying the skills ofour
military, diplomats, and development experts.These kinds of measures will help us diminish military risk,
act before crises and conﬂicts erupt, and ensure that governments are better able to serve their people.

Secure Cyberspace

Cybersecurity threats represent one of the most serious national security, public safety, and economic
challenges we face as a nation.The very technologies that em power us to lead and create also empower
those who would disrupt and destroy.They enable our military superiority, but our unclassiﬁed govern-
ment networks are constantly probed by intruders. Our daily lives and public safety depend on power
and electric grids, but potential adversaries could use cyber vulnerabilities to disrupt them on a massive
scale. The Internet and e-commerce are keys to our economic competitiveness, but cyber criminals
have cost companies and consumers hundreds of millions ofdollars and valuable intellectual property.

The threats we face range from individual criminal hackers to organized criminal groups, from terrorist
networks to advanced nation states. Defending against these threats to our security, prosperity, and
personal privacy requires networks that are secure, trustworthy, and resilient. Our digital infrastruc-
ture, therefore, is a strategic national asset, and protecting it—whi|e safeguarding privacy and civil
|iberties—is a national security priority. We will deter, prevent, detect, defend against, and quickly recover
from cyber intrusions and attacks by:

Investing in People and Techno|ogy:To advance that goal, we are working across the government and
with the private sector to design more secure technology that gives us the ability to better protect and
to improve the resilience of critical government and industry systems and networks. We will continue
to invest in the cutting-edge research and development necessary for the innovation and discovery
we need to meet these challenges. We have begun a comprehensive national campaign to promote

27

NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY

cybersecurity awareness and digital literacy from our boardrooms to our classrooms and to build a
digital workforce for the 21 st century.

Strengthening Partnerships: Neither government nor the private sector nor individual citizens can meet
this challenge a|one—we will expand the ways we work together. We will also strengthen our interna-
tional partnerships on a range ofissues, including the development of norms for acceptable conduct
in cyberspace; laws concerning cybercrime; data preservation, protection, and privacy; and approaches
for network defense and response to cyber attacks. We will work with all the key players— including
all levels of government and the private sector, nationally and internationa||y—to investigate cyber
intrusion and to ensure an organized and uniﬁed response to future cyber incidents. Just as we do for
natural disasters, we have to have plans and resources in place beforehand.

Prosperity

“The answers to our problems don’t lie beyond our reach. They exist in our laboratories
and universities; in our ﬁelds and our factories; in the imaginations of our entrepreneurs
and the pride of the hardest—working people on Earth. Those qualities that have made
America the greatest force of progress and prosperity in human history we still possess in
ample measure. What is required now is for this country to pull together, confront boldly
the challenges We face, and take responsibility for our future once more.”

—President Barack Obama, Address to joint Session of Congress, February 24, 2009

The foundation ofAmerican leadership must be a prosperous American economy. And a growing and
open global economy serves as a source of opportu nity for the American people and a source of strength
for the United States.The free ﬂow of information, people, goods, and services has also advanced peace
among nations, as those places that have emerged more prosperous are often more stable. Yet we have
also seen how shocks to the global economy can precipitate disaster—inc|uding the loss ofjobs, a
decline in standards of living in parts ofour country, and instability and a loss of U.S. inﬂuence abroad.
Meanwhile, growing prosperity around the world has made economic power more diffuse, creating a
more competitive environment for America's people and businesses.

To allow each American to pursue the opportunity upon which our prosperity depends, we must
build a stronger foundation for economic growth.That foundation must include access to a complete
and competitive education for every American; a transformation of the way that we produce and use
energy, so that we reduce our dependence on fossil fuels and lead the world in creating newjobs and
industry; access to quality, affordable health care so our people, businesses, and government are not
constrained by rising costs; and the responsible management ofour Federal budget so that we balance
our priorities and are not burdened by debt.To succeed, we must also ensure that America stays on the
cutting edge of the science and innovation that supports our prosperity, defense, and international
technological leadership.

*28*

III. ADVANCING OUR INTERESTS

This new foundation must underpin and sustain an international economic system that is critical to both
our prosperity and to the peace and security ofthe world. We must reinvigorate and fortify it for the
21 st century: by preventing cycles of boom and bust with new rules ofthe road at home and abroad; by
saving more and spending less; by resisting protectionism and promoting trade that is free and fair; by
coordinating our actions with other cou ntries, and reforming international institutions to give emerging
economies a greater voice and greater responsibility; and by supporting development that promotes
good governance, unleashes the potential of different populations, and creates new markets overseas.
Taken together, these actions can ensure inclusive growth that is balanced and sustained.

Strengthen Education and Human Capital

In a global economy of vastly increased mobility and interdependence, our own prosperity and leader-
ship depends increasingly on our ability to provide our citizens with the education that they need to
succeed, while attracting the premier human capital for our workforce.We must ensure that the most
innovative ideas take root in America, while providing our people with the skills that they need to
com pete. That means we must:

Improve Education at All Levels: The United States has lost ground in education, even as our competi-
tiveness depends on educating our children to succeed in a global economy based on knowledge and
innovation. We are working to provide a complete and competitive education for all Americans, to
include supporting high standards for early learning, reforming public schools, increasing access to
higher education and job training, and promoting high-demand skills and education for emerging
industries. We will also restore U.S. leadership in higher education by seeking the goal of leading the
world in the proportion of college graduates by 2020.

Invest in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math Education (STEM): America's long-term leader-
ship depends on educating and producing future scientists and innovators. We will invest more in
STEM education so students can learn to think critically in science, math, engineering, and technology;
improve the quality of math and science teaching so American students are no longer outperformed
by those in other nations; and expand STEM education and career opportunities for underrepresented
groups, including women and girls. We will work with partners—from the private-sector and nonproﬁt
organizations to universities—to promote education and careers in science and technology.

Increase International Education and Exchange:The pervasiveness of the English language and American
cultural inﬂuence are great advantages to Americans traveling, working, and negotiating in foreign
countries. But we must develop skills to help us succeed in a dynamic and diverse global economy. We
will support programs that cultivate interest and scholarship in foreign languages and intercultural
affairs, including international exchange programs.This will allow our citizens to build connections with
peoples overseas and to develop skills and contacts that will help them thrive in the global economy.
We must also welcome more foreign exchange students to our shores, recognizing the beneﬁts that can
result from deeper ties with foreign publics and increased understanding of American society.

Pursue Comprehensive Immigration Reform:The United States is a nation of immigrants. Our ability to
innovate, our ties to the world, and our economic prosperity depend on our nation's capacity to welcome
and assimilate immigrants, and a visa system which welcomes skilled professionals from around the

29

NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY

world. At the same time, effective border security and immigration enforcement must keep the country
safe and deter unlawful entry. Indeed, persistent problems in immigration policy consume valuable
resources needed to advance other security objectives and make it harder to focus on the most danger-
ous threats facing ourcou ntry. Ultimately, our national security depends on striking a balance between
security and openness.To advance this goal, we must pursue comprehensive immigration reform that
effectively secures our borders, while repairing a broken system that fails to serve the needs of our nation.

Enhance Science, Technology, and Innovation

Reafﬁrming America's role as the global engine of scientiﬁc discovery and technological innovation
has never been more critical. Challenges like climate change, pandemic disease, and resource scarcity
demand new innovation. Meanwhile, the nation that leads the world in building a clean energy economy
will enjoy a substantial economic and security advantage.That is why the Administration is investing
heavily in research, improving education in science and math, promoting developments in energy, and
expanding international cooperation.

Transform our Energy Economy: As long as we are dependent on fossil fuels, we need to ensure the
security and free ﬂow of global energy resources. But without signiﬁcant and timely adjustments, our
energy dependence will continue to undermine our security and prosperity. This will leave us vulnerable
to energy supply disruptions and manipulation and to changes in the environment on an unprecedented
scale.

The United States has a window ofopportunity to lead in the development ofclean energy technology.
If successful, the United States will lead in this new Industrial Revolution in clean energy that will be
a major contributor to our economic prosperity. lfwe do not develop the policies that encourage the
private sector to seize the opportunity, the United States will fall behind and increasingly become an
importer of these new energy technologies.

We have already made the largest investment in clean energy in history, but there is much more to do
to build on this foundation. We must continue to transform our energy economy, leveraging private
capital to accelerate deployment ofclean energy technologies that will cut greenhouse gas emissions,
improve energy efﬁciency, increase use of renewable and nuclear power, reduce the dependence of
vehicles on oil, and diversify energy sources and suppliers. We will invest in research and next-generation
technology, modernize the way we distribute electricity, and encourage the usage of transitional fuels,
while moving towards clean energy produced at home.

Invest in Research: Research and development is central to our broader national capacity. Incidents
like the outbreak of H1 N1 inﬂuenza and the challenge of identifying new, renewable sources ofenergy
highlight the importance of research in basic and applied science. We are reversing the decades-long
decline in federal funding for research, including the single largest infusion to basic science research
in American history. Research and innovation is not something government can do on its own, which
is why we will support and create incentives to encourage private initiatives. The United States has
always excelled in our ability to turn science and technology into engineering and products, and we
must continue to do so in the future.

30

III. ADVANCING OUR INTERESTS

Expand International Science Partnerships: America's scientiﬁc leadership has always been widely
admired around the world, and we must continue to expand cooperation and partnership in science
and technology. We have launched a number of Science Envoys around the globe and are promoting
stronger relationships between American scientists, universities, and researchers and their counterparts
abroad. We will reestablish a commitment to science and technology in our foreign assistance efforts
and develop a strategy for international science and national security.

Emp|oyTechno|ogy to Protect our Nation: Our renewed commitment to science and techno|ogy—and
ou r ability to apply the ingenuity ofour public and private sectors toward the most difﬁcu It foreign policy
and security challenges ofour time—wi|| help us protect ourcitizens and advance U.S. national security
priorities.These include, for example, protecting U.S. and allied forces from asymmetric attacks; support-
ing arms control and nonproliferation agreements; preventing terrorists from attacking our homeland;
preventing and managing widespread disease outbreaks; securing the supply chain; detecting weapons
of mass destruction before they reach our borders; and protecting our information, communication,
and transportation infrastructure.

Leverage and Grow our Space Capabilities: For over 50 years, our space community has been a catalyst
for innovation and a hallmark of U.S. technological leadership. Our space capabilities underpin global
commerce and scientiﬁc advancements and bolster our national security strengths and those ofour
allies and partners.To promote security and stability in space, we will pursue activities consistent with
the inherent right of self-defense, deepen cooperation with allies and friends, and work with all nations
toward the responsible and peaceful use of space.To maintain the advantages afforded to the United
States by space, we must also take several actions. We must continue to encourage cutting-edge space
technology by investing in the people and industrial base that develops them. We will invest in the
research and development of next-generation space technologies and capabilities that beneﬁt our
commercial, civil, scientiﬁc exploration, and national security communities, in order to maintain the
viability of space for future generations. And we will promote a uniﬁed effort to strengthen our space
industrial base and work with universities to encourage students to pursue space-related careers.

Achieve Balanced and Sustainable Growth

Balanced and sustainable growth, at home and throughout the global economy, drives the momentum
of the U.S. economy and underpins our prosperity. A steadily growing global economy means an expand-
ing market for exports of our goods and services. Overtime, deepening linkages among markets and
businesses will provide the setting in which the energies and entrepreneurship of our private sector can
ﬂourish, generating technologies, business growth, and job creation that will boost living standards for
Americans. United States economic leadership now has to adapt to the rising prominence ofemerging
economies; the growing size, speed, and sophistication of ﬁnancial markets; the multiplicity of market
participants around the globe; and the struggling economies that have so far failed to integrate into
the global system.

To promote prosperity for all Americans, we will need to lead the international community to expand the
inclusive growth of the integrated, global economy. At the same time, we will need to lead international
efforts to prevent a recurrence of economic imbalances and ﬁnancial excesses, while managing the

31

NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY

many security threats and global challenges that affect global economic stability. To promote growth
that can be balanced and sustained, we will:

Prevent Renewed Instability in the Global Economy: The recent crisis taught us the very high cost ofthe
boom and bust cycle that has plagued the global economy and has served neither the United States
nor our international partners. Once Americans found themselves in debt or out of work, our demand
for foreign goods fell sharply. As foreign economies weakened, their ﬁnancial institutions and public
ﬁnances came under stress too, reinforcing the global slowdown. We must prevent the reemergence
ofim balanced gro\Nth, with American consumers buying and borrowing, and Asian and other export-
ing countries selling and accumulating claims. We must pursue reform of the U.S. ﬁnancial system to
strengthen the health ofour economy and encourage Americans to save more. And we must prevent
the reemergence of excesses in our ﬁnancial institutions based on irresponsible lending behavior, and
abetted by lax and uncoordinated regulation.

Save More And Export More: Striking a better balance at home means saving more and spending less,
reforming our ﬁnancial system, and reducing our long-term budget deﬁcit. With those changes, we will
see a greater emphasis on exports that we can build, produce, and sell all over the world, with the goal
of doubling U.S. exports by 201 4. This is ultimately an employment strategy, because higher exports
will support millions of well-paying American jobs, including those that service innovative and proﬁt-
able new technologies. As a part ofthat effort, we are reforming our export controls consistent with
our national security imperatives.

ShiftTo Greater Domestic Demand Abroad: For the rest of the world, especially in some emerging market
and developing countries, a better balance means placing greater emphasis on increasing domestic
demand as the leading driver ofgrowth and opening markets.Those countries will be able to import
the capital and technologies needed to sustain the remarkable productivity gains already underway.
Rebalancing will provide an opportunity for workers and consumers over time to enjoy the higher
standards of living made possible by those gains. As balanced growth translates into sustained growth,
middle-income, and poor cou ntries, many of which are not yet sufﬁciently integrated into the global
economy, can accelerate the process of convergence of living standards toward richer countries—a
process that will become a driver of growth for the global economy for decades to come.

Open Foreign Markets to Our Products and Services: The United States has long had one ofthe most
open markets in the world. We have been a leader in expanding an open trading system.That has
underwritten the growth of other developed and emerging markets alike. Openness has also forced
ourcom panies and workers to compete and innovate, and at the same time, has offered market access
crucial to the success of so many countries around the world. We will maintain our open investment
environment, consistent with our national security goals. In this new era, opening markets around the
globe will promote global competition and innovation and will be crucial to our prosperity. We will
pursue a trade agenda that includes an ambitious and balanced Doha multilateral trade agreement,
bilateral and multilateral trade agreements that reﬂect our values and interests, and engagement with
the transpaciﬁc partnership countries to shape a regional agreement with high standards.

As we go forward, our trade policy will be an important part ofoureffort to capitalize on the opportu ni-
ties presented by globalization, but will also be part ofoureffort to equip Americans to compete.To make

32

III. ADVANCING OUR INTERESTS

trade agreements work for Americans, we will take steps to restore conﬁdence, with realistic programs
to deal with transition costs, and promote innovation, infrastructure, healthcare reform and education.
Our agreements will contain achievable enforcement mechanisms to ensure that the gains we negotiate
are in fact realized and will be structured to reﬂect U.S. interests, especially on labor and environment.

Build Cooperation with Our International Partners: The United States has supported the G-20's emer-
gence as the premier forum for international economic cooperation.This ﬂows from the recognition that
we need a broader and more inclusive engagement with the countries responsible for most ofglobal
output and trade. U.S. leadership in the G-20 will be focused on securing sustainable and balanced
growth, coordinating reform of ﬁnancial sector regulation, fostering global economic development,
and promoting energy security. We also need ofﬁcial international ﬁnancial institutions to be as modern
and agile as the global economy they serve.Through the G-20, we will pursue governance reform at
the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and World Bank. We will also broaden our leadership in other
international ﬁnancial institutions so that the rapidly growing countries of the world see their repre-
sentation increase and are willing to invest those institutions with the authority they need to promote
the stability and growth ofglobal output and trade.

Deterring Threats to the International Financial System: Today's open and global ﬁnancial system also
exposes us to global ﬁnancial threats. Just as we work to make the most ofthe opportunities that glo-
balization brings, the actors that pose a threat to our national security—terrorists, proliferators, narcotics
trafﬁckers, corrupt ofﬁcials, and others—are abusing the global ﬁnancial system to raise, move, and safe-
guard funds that support their illicit activities or from which they derive proﬁt.Their support networks
have global reach and are not contained by national borders. Our strategy to attack these networks
must respond in kind and target their illicit resources and access to the global ﬁnancial system through
ﬁnancial measures, administration and enforcement of regulatory authorities, outreach to the private
sector and ourforeign partners, and collaboration on international standards and information sharing.

Accelerate Sustainable Development

The growth ofemerging economies in recent decades has lifted people out of poverty and forged a
more interconnected and vibrant global economy. But development has been uneven, progress is fragile,
and too many ofthe world's people still live without the beneﬁts that development affords.Whi|e some
countries are growing, many lag behind—mired in insecurity, constrained by poorgovernance, or overly
dependent upon commodity prices. But sustained economic progress requires faster, sustainable, and
more inclusive deve|opment.That is why we are pursuing a range of speciﬁc initiatives in areas such
as food security and global health that will be essential to the future security and prosperity of nations
and peoples around the globe.

Increase Investments in Deve|opment:The United States has an interest in working with our allies to help
the world's poorest countries grow into productive and prosperous economies governed by capable,
democratic, and accountable state institutions. We will ensure a greater and more deliberate focus
on a global development agenda across the United States Government, from policy analysis through
policy imp|ementation.We are increasing our foreign assistance, expanding our investments in effective
multilateral development institutions, and leveraging the engagement of others to share the burden.

33

NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY

Invest in the Foundations of Long-Term Deve|opment:The United States will initiate long-term invest-
ments that recognize and reward governments that demonstrate the capacity and political will to pursue
sustainable development strategies and ensure that all policy instruments at ourdisposal are harnessed
to these ends. And we will provide our support in multiple ways—by strengthening the ability of gov-
ernments and communities to manage development challenges and investing in strong institutions
that foster the democratic accountability that helps sustain development. This will expand the circle of
nations—particu|ar|y in Africa—who are capable of reaping the beneﬁts of the global economy, while
contributing to global security and prosperity.

Exercise Leadership in the Provision ofG|oba| Public Goods: Ourapproach needs to reﬂect the fact that
there are a set ofdevelopment challenges that strongly affect the likelihood of progress, but cannot be
addressed by individual countries acting alone. Particularly in Africa, these cha||enges—such as adap-
tation to global warming, the control ofepidemic disease, and the knowledge to increase agricultural
productivity—are not adequately addressed in bilateral efforts. We will shape the international archi-
tecture and work with our global partners to address these challenges, and increase our investments
and engagement to transition to a low-carbon growth trajectory, support the resilience of the poorest
nations to the effects of climate change, and strengthen food security. We must also pursue potential
"game changers” for development such as new vaccines, weather-resistant seed varieties, and green
energy technologies.

Spend TaXpayers’Dollars Wisely

The United States Government has an obligation to make the best use of taxpayer money, and our ability
to achieve long-term goals depends upon ourﬁscal responsibility. A responsible budget involves mak-
ing tough choices to live within our means; holding departments and agencies accountable for their
spending and their performance; harnessing technology to improve government performance; and
being open and honest with the American people. A responsible budget also depends upon working
with our global partners and institutions to share burdens and leverage U.S. investments to achieve
global goals. Our national security goals can only be reached if we make hard choices and work with
international partners to share burdens.

Reduce the Deﬁcit: We cannot grow our economy in the long term unless we put the United States
back on a sustainable ﬁscal path.To begin this effort, the Administration has proposed a 3-year freeze
in nonsecurity discretionary spending, a new fee on the largest ﬁnancial services companies to recoup
taxpayer losses for the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP), and the closing of tax loopholes and
unnecessary su bsidies.The Administration has created a bipartisan ﬁscal commission to suggest further
steps for medium-term deﬁcit reduction and will work for ﬁscally responsible health insurance reform
that will bring down the rate ofgro\Nth in health care costs, a key driver of the cou ntry’s ﬁscal future.

Reform Acquisition and Contracting Processes:Wastefu| spending, duplicative programs, and contracts
with poor oversight have no place in the United States Government. Cost-effective and efﬁcient pro-
cesses are particularly important for the Department of Defense, which accounts for approximately
70 percent ofall Federal procurement spending. We will scrutinize our programs and terminate or
restructure those that are outdated, du plicative, ineffective, or wastefu|.The result will be more relevant,

34

III. ADVANCING OUR INTERESTS

capable, and effective programs and systems that our military wants and needs. We are also reforming
Federal contracting and strengthening contracting practices and management oversight with a goal
of saving Federal agencies $40 billion dollars a year.

|ncreaseTransparency: Americans have a right to know how their tax dollars are spent, but that informa-
tion can be obscured or unavailable. In some instances, incomplete accounting ofthe budget has been
used to conceal the reality of our ﬁscal situation.To uphold our commitment to a transparent budget
process, we are simultaneously requesting both base budget and overseas contingency operations costs,
with the same amount ofjustiﬁcation and explanatory material for each, so that Americans can see the
true cost ofour war efforts and hold leaders accountable for decisions with all of the facts.

Values

“We uphold our most cherished values not only because doing so is right, but because
it strengthens our country and keeps us safe. Time and again, our values have been our
best national security asset—in War and peace, in times of ease, and in eras of upheaval.
Fidelity to our values is the reason why the United States of America grew from a small
string of colonies under the writ of an empire to the strongest nation in the world.”

—President Barack Obama, National Archives, May 21, 2009

The United States believes certain values are universal and will work to promote them worldwide. These
include an individual’s freedom to speak their mind, assemble without fear, worship as they please,
and choose their own leaders; they also include dignity, tolerance, and equality among all people, and
the fair and equitable administration ofjustice.The United States was founded upon a belief in these
values. At home, ﬁdelity to these values has extended the promise ofAmerica ever more fully, to ever
more people. Abroad, these values have been claimed by people of every race, region, and religion.
Most nations are parties to international agreements that recognize this commonality. And nations
that embrace these values for their citizens are ultimately more successfu|—and friendly to the United
States—than those that do not.

Yet after an era that saw substantial gains for these values around the world, democratic develop-
ment has stalled in recent years. In some cultures, these values are being equated with the ugly face
of modernity and are seen to encroach upon cherished identities. In other cou ntries, autocratic rulers
have repressed basic human rights and democratic practices in the name of economic development
and national unity. Even where some governments have adopted democratic practices, authoritarian
rulers have undermined electoral processes and restricted the space for opposition and civil society,
imposing a growing number of legal restrictions so as to impede the rights of people to assemble and
to access information. And while there has been substantial progress in combating poverty in many
parts ofthe world, too many ofthe world's people still lack the dignity that comes with the opportunity
to pursue a better life.

*35*

NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY

The United States supports those who seek to exercise universal rights around the world. We promote
our values above all by living them at home.We continue to engage nations, institutions, and peoples in

pursuit ofthese values abroad. And we recognize the link between development and political progress.

In doing so, our goals are realistic, as we recognize that different cultures and traditions give life to these
values in distinct ways. Moreover, America's inﬂuence comes not from perfection, but from our striving
to overcome our imperfections.The constant struggle to perfect our union is what makes the American
story inspiring.That is why acknowledging our past shortcomings—and highlighting our efforts to
remedy them—is a means of promoting our values.

America will not impose any system ofgovernment on another country, but our long-term security and
prosperity depends on our steady support for universal values, which sets us apart from our enemies,
adversarial governments, and many potential competitors for inﬂ uence. We will do so through a variety
of means—by speaking out for universal rights, supporting fragile democracies and civil society, and
supporting the dignity that comes with development.

Strengthen the Power of Our Example

More than any other action that we have taken, the power of America's example has helped spread
freedom and democracy abroad.That is why we must always seek to uphold these values notjust when
it is easy, but when it is hard. Advancing our interests may involve new arrangements to confront threats
like terrorism, but these practices and structures must always be in line with ourConstitution, preserve
our people's privacy and civil liberties, and withstand the checks and balances that have served us so
we||.To sustain our ﬁdelity to our va|ues—and our credibility to promote them around the wor|d—we
will continue to:

Prohibit Torture without Exception or Equivocation: Brutal methods of interrogation are inconsistent
with our values, undermine the rule of law, and are not effective means of obtaining information.They
alienate the United States from the world. They serve as a recruitment and propaganda tool for terror-
ists.They increase the will ofour enemies to ﬁght against us, and endanger our troops when they are
captured.The United States will not use or support these methods.

Legal Aspects of Cou ntering Terrorism: The increased risk of terrorism necessitates a capacity to detain
and interrogate suspected violent extremists, but that framework must align with our laws to be effective
and sustainable. When we are able, we will prosecute terrorists in Federal courts or in reformed military
commissions that are fair, legitimate, and effective. For detainees who cannot be prosecuted—but pose
a danger to the American peop|e—we must have clear, defensible, and |a\Nfu| standards.We must have
fair procedures and a thorough process of periodic review, so that any prolonged detention is carefully
evaluated and justiﬁed. And keeping with our Constitutional system, it will be subject to checks and
ba|ances.The goal is an approach that can be sustained by future Administrations, with support from
both political parties and all three branches of government.

Balance the Imperatives of Secrecy and Transparency: For the sake ofour security, some information
must be protected from public disc|osure—for instance, to protect our troops, our sources and methods
of intelligence-gathering or conﬁdential actions that keep the American people safe. Yet our democ-
racy depends upon transparency, and whenever possible, we are making information available to the

36

III. ADVANCING OUR INTERESTS

American people so that they can make informed judgments and hold their leaders accountable. For
instance, when we invoke the State Secrets privilege, we will follow clear procedures so as to provide
greater accountability and to ensure the privilege is invoked only when necessary and in the narrowest
way possible. We will never invoke the privilege to hide a violation of law or to avoid embarrassment
to the government.

Protect Civil Liberties, Privacy, and Oversight: Protecting civil liberties and privacy are integral to the
vibrancy of our democracy and the exercise of freedom. We are balancing our solemn commitments
to these virtues with the mandate to provide security for the American people. Vigorous oversight of
national security activities by our three branches of government and vigilant compliance with the rule of
law allow us to maintain this balance, afﬁrm to our friends and allies the constitutional ideals we uphold.

Uphold the Rule of Law: The rule of |aw—and our capacity to enforce it—advances our national security
and strengthens our leadership. At home, ﬁdelity to our laws and su pport for our law enforcement com-
munity safeguards American citizens and interests, while protecting and advancing our values. Around
the globe, it allows us to hold actors accountable, while supporting both international security and the
stability ofthe global economy. America's commitment to the rule of law is fundamental to ourefforts to
build an international order that is capable of confronting the emerging challenges ofthe 21 st century.

Draw Strength from Diversity: The United States has beneﬁted throughout our history when we have
drawn strength from our diversity. While those who advocate on behalfof extremist ideologies seek
to sow discord among ethnic and religious groups, America stands as an example of how people from
different backgrounds can be united through their commitment to shared values. Within our own
communities, those who seek to recruit and radicalize individuals will often try to prey upon isolation
and alienation. Our own commitment to extending the promise ofAmerica will both draw a contrast
with those who try to drive people apart, while countering attempts to enlist individuals in ideological,
religious, or ethnic extremism.

Promote Democracy and Human Rights Abroad

The United States supports the expansion of democracy and human rights abroad because governments
that respect these values are morejust, peaceful, and legitimate. We also do so because their success
abroad fosters an environment that supports America's national interests. Political systems that protect
u niversal rights are ultimately more stable, successful, and secure. As our history shows, the United States
can more effectively forge consensus to tackle shared challenges when working with governments that
reﬂect the will and respect the rights of their people, rather than just the narrow interests of those in
power. The United States is advancing universal values by:

Ensuring that New and Fragile Democracies De|iverTangib|e Improvements forTheir Citizens: The
United States must support democracy, human rights, and development together, as they are mutually
reinforcing. We are working closely with citizens, communities, and political and civil society leaders
to strengthen key institutions of democratic accountabi|ity—free and fair electoral processes, strong
legislatures, civilian control of militaries, honest police forces, independent and fairjudiciaries, a free
and independent press, a vibrant private sector, and a robust civil society.To do so, we are harnessing

37

NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY

our bilateral and multilateral capabilities to help nascent democracies deliver services that respond
to the needs and preferences of their citizens, since democracies without development rarely survive.

Practicing Principled Engagement with Non-Democratic Regimes: Even when we are focused on
interests such as counterterrorism, nonproliferation, or enhancing economic ties, we will always seek
in parallel to expand individual rights and opportunities through our bilateral engagement.The United
States is pursuing a dual-track approach in which we seek to improve government-to-government
relations and use this dialogue to advance human rights, while engaging civil society and peaceful
political opposition, and encouraging U.S. nongovernmental actors to do the same. More substantive
government-to-government relations can create permissive conditions for civil society to operate and
for more extensive people-to-people exchanges. But when our overtures are rebuffed, we must lead
the international community in using public and private diplomacy, and drawing on incentives and
disincentives, in an effort to change repressive behavior.

Recognizing the Legitimacy ofA|| Peaceful Democratic Movements: America respects the right ofall
peaceful, law-abiding, and nonviolent voices to be heard around the world, even if we disagree with
them. Su pport for democracy must not be about support for speciﬁc candidates or movements. America
will welcome all legitimately elected, peaceful governments, provided they govern with respect for
the rights and dignity ofall their people and consistent with their international ob|igations.Those who
seek democracy to obtain power, but are ruthless once they do, will forfeit the support of the United
States. Governments must maintain power through consent, not coercion, and place legitimate political
processes above party or narrow interest.

Supporting the Rights ofWomen and Girls: Women should have access to the same opportunities and
be able to make the same choices as men. Experience shows that countries are more peaceful and
prosperous when women are accorded full and equal rights and opportunity. When those rights and
opportunities are denied, countries often lag behind. Furthermore, women and girls often dispropor-
tionally bear the burden ofcrises and conﬂict. Therefore the United States is working with regional and
international organizations to prevent violence against women and girls, especially in conﬂict zones.
We are supporting women's equal access tojustice and their participation in the political process. We
are promoting child and maternal health. We are combating human trafﬁcking, especially in women
and girls, through domestic and international law enforcement. And we are supporting education,
employment, and micro-ﬁnance to empower women globally.

Strengthening International Norms Against Corruption: We are working within the broader international
system, including the U.N., G-20, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD),
and the international ﬁnancial institutions, to promote the recognition that pervasive corruption is a
violation of basic human rights and a severe impediment to development and global security. We will
work with governments and civil society organizations to bring greater transparency and accountability
to government budgets, expenditures, and the assets of public ofﬁcials. And we will institutionalize
transparent practices in international aid ﬂows, international banking and tax policy, and private sec-
tor engagement around natural resources to make it harder for ofﬁcials to steal and to strengthen the
efforts of citizens to hold their governments accountable.

38

III. ADVANCING OUR INTERESTS

Building a Broader Coalition of Actors to Advance Universal Values: We are working to build support
for democracy, rule of law, and human rights by working with other governments, nongovernmental
organizations, and multilateral fora.The United States is committed to working to shape and strengthen
existing institutions that are not delivering on their potential, such as the United Nations Human Rights
Cou nci|.We are working within the broader U.N. system and through regional mechanisms to strengthen
human rights monitoring and enforcement mechanisms, so that individuals and countries are held
accountable for their violation of international human rights norms. And we will actively support the
leadership of emerging democracies as they assume a more active role in advancing basic human rights
and democratic values in their regions and on the global stage.

Marshalling NewTechno|ogies and Promoting the Right to Access |nformation:The emergence oftech-
nologies such as the Internet, wireless networks, mobile smart-phones, investigative forensics, satellite
and aerial imagery, and distributed remote sensing infrastructure has created powerful new opportu ni-
ties to advance democracy and human rights.These technologies have fueled people-powered political
movements, made it possible to shine a spotlight on human rights abuses nearly instantaneously, and
increased avenues for free speech and unrestricted communication around the world. We support the
dissemination and use of these technologies to facilitate freedom of expression, expand access to infor-
mation, increase governmental transparency and accountability, and counter restrictions on their use.
We will also better utilize such technologies to effectively comm unicate our own messages to the world.

Promote Dignity by Meeting Basic Needs

The freedom that America stands for includes freedom from want. Basic human rights cannot thrive in
places where human beings do not have access to enough food, or clean water, or the medicine they
need to survive.The United States has embraced the United Nation's Millennium Development Goals
and is working with others in pursuit of the eradication of extreme poverty—efforts that are particularly
critical to the future of nations and peoples ofAfrica. And we will continue to promote the dignity that
comes through development efforts such as:

Pursuing a Comprehensive Global Health Strategy: The United States has a moral and strategic interest
in promoting global hea|th.When a child dies ofa preventable disease, it offends ourconscience; when
a disease goes unchecked, it can endanger our own health; when children are sick, development is
sta||ed.That is why we are continuing to invest in the ﬁght against HIV/A|DS.Through the Global Health
Initiative, we will strengthen health systems and invest in interventions to address areas where progress
has lagged, including maternal and child health. And we are also pursuing the goal of reducing the
burden of malaria and tuberculosis and seeking the elimination of important neglected tropical diseases.

Promoting Food Security:The United States is working with partners around the world to advance a food
security initiative that combats hunger and builds the capacity of countries to feed their people. Instead
of sim ply providing aid for developing countries, we are focusing on new methods and technologies for
agricultural development. This is consistent with an approach in which aid is not an end in itse|f—the
purpose of our foreign assistance will be to create the conditions where it is no longer needed.

Leading Efforts to Address Humanitarian Crises:Togetherwith the American people and the international
community, we will continue to respond to humanitarian crises to ensure that those in need have the

39

NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY

protection and assistance they need. In such circumstances, we are also placing a greater emphasis on
fostering long-term recovery. Haiti's devastating earthquake is only the most recent reminder of the
human and material consequences of natural disasters, and a changing climate portends a future in
which the United States must be better prepared and resourced to exercise robust leadership to help
meet critical humanitarian needs.

International Order

“As President of the United States, I will work tirelessly to protect America’s security and
to advance our interests. But no one nation can meet the challenges of the 21st century
on its own, nor dictate its terms to the world. That is why America seeks an international
system that lets nations pursue their interests peacefully, especially when those interests
diverge; a system where the universal rights of human beings are respected, and violations
of those rights are opposed; a system where We hold ourselves to the same standards that
We apply to other nations, with clear rights and responsibilities for all.”

—President Barack Obama, Moscow, Russia,_luly 7, 2009

The United States will protect its people and advance our prosperity irrespective of the actions of any
other nation, but we have an interest in a just and sustainable international order that can foster collec-
tive action to confront common cha||enges.This international order will support our efforts to advance
security, prosperity, and universal values, but it is also an end that we seek in its own right. Because
without such an international order, the forces of instability and disorder will undermine global secu-
rity. And without effective mechanisms to forge international cooperation, challenges that recognize
no borders—such as climate change, pandemic disease, and transnational crime—wi|| persist and
potentially spread.

International institutions—most prominently NATO and the United Nations—have been at the center
ofour international order since the mid 20th century. Yet, an international architecture that was largely
forged in the wake ofWor|d War II is buckling under the weight of new threats, making us less able to
seize new opportunities. Even though many deﬁning trends ofthe 21 st century affect all nations and
peoples, too often, the mutual interests of nations and peoples are ignored in favor of suspicion and
self-defeating com petition.

What is needed, therefore, is a realignment of national actions and international institutions with shared
interests. And when national interests do co||ide—or countries prioritize their interests in different
ways—those nations that defy international norms or fail to meet their sovereign responsibilities will
be denied the incentives that come with greater integration and collaboration with the international
community.

No international order can be supported by international institutions alone. Our mutual interests must
be underpinned by bilateral, multilateral, and global strategies that address underlying sources of
insecurity and build new spheres of cooperation.To that end, strengthening bilateral and multilateral

*40*

III. ADVANCING OUR INTERESTS

cooperation cannot be accomplished simply by working inside formal institutions and frameworks. It
requires sustained outreach to foreign governments, political leaderships, and other critical constituen-
cies that must commit the necessary capabilities and resources to enable effective, collective action. And
it means building upon our traditional alliances, while also cultivating partnerships with new centers of
inﬂuence.Taken together, these approaches will allow us to foster more effective global cooperation to
confront challenges that know no borders and affect every nation.

Ensure Strong Alliances

The foundation of United States, regional, and global security will remain America's relations with our
allies, and our commitment to their security is unshakable. These relationships must be constantly
cultivated, not just because they are indispensible for U.S. interests and national security objectives,
but because they are fundamental to our collective security. Alliances are force multipliers: through
multinational cooperation and coordination, the sum of our actions is always greater than if we act
alone. We will continue to maintain the capacity to defend ourallies against old and new threats. We will
also continue to closely consult with ourallies as well as newly emerging partners and organizations so
that we revitalize and expand our cooperation to achieve common objectives. And we will continue to
mutually beneﬁt from the collective security provided by strong alliances.

Although the United States and our allies and partners may sometimes disagree on speciﬁc issues, we
will act based upon mutual respect and in a manner that continues to strengthen an international order
that beneﬁts all responsible international actors.

Strengthening Security Relationships: Our ability to sustain these alliances, and to build coalitions
of support toward common objectives, depends in part on the capabilities of America's Armed Forces.
Similarly, the relationships our Armed Forces have developed with foreign militaries are a critical com-
ponent ofour global engagement and support our collective security.

We will continue to ensure that we can prevail against a wide range of potential adversaries—to include
hostile states and nonstate actors—whi|e broadly shaping the strategic environment using all tools to
advance our common security. We will continue to reassure our allies and partners by retaining our abil-
ity to bring precise, sustained, and effective capabilities to bear against a wide range of military threats
and decisively defeat the forces of hostile regional powers. We will work with our allies and partners
to enhance the resilience of U.S. forward posture and facilities against potential attacks. Finally, we will
strengthen our regional deterrence postures—for example, through phased, adaptive missile defense
architectures—in order to make certain that regional adversaries gain no advantages from their acquisi-
tion of new, offensive military capabilities.

European Allies: Our relationship with our European allies remains the cornerstone for U.S. engage-
ment with the world, and a catalyst for international action. We will engage with our allies bilaterally,
and pursue close consultation on a broad range of security and economic issues. The North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) is the pre-eminent security alliance in the world today. With our 27 NATO
allies, and the many partners with which NATO cooperates, we will strengthen our collective ability to
promote security, deter vital threats, and defend our people. NATO's new Strategic Concept will provide
an opportunity to revitalize and reform the A||iance.We are committed to ensuring that NATO is able to

41

NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY

address the full range of21 st century challenges, while serving as a foundation of European security. And
we will continue to anchor ourcommitment in Article V, which is fundamental to our collective security.

Building on European aspirations for greater integration, we are committed to partnering with a stronger
European Union to advance our shared goals, especially in promoting democracy and prosperity in
Eastern European countries that are still completing their democratic transition and in responding to
pressing issues of mutual concern. We will remain dedicated to advancing stability and democracy in
the Balkans and to resolving conﬂicts in the Caucasus and in Cyprus. We will continue to engage with
Turkey on a broad range of mutual goals, especially with regard to pursuit of stability in its region. And
we will seek to strengthen existing European institutions so that they are more inclusive and more
effective in building conﬁdence, reducing tensions, and protecting freedom.

Asian Allies: Our alliances with Japan, South Korea, Australia, the Philippines, and Thailand are the
bedrock of security in Asia and a foundation of prosperity in the Asia-Paciﬁc region. We will continue to
deepen and update these alliances to reﬂect the dynamism of the region and strategic trends of the 21 st
century. Japan and South Korea are increasingly important leaders in addressing regional and global
issues, as well as in embodying and promoting our common democratic values. We are modernizing our
security relationships with both countries to face evolving 21 st century global security challenges and
to reﬂect the principle ofequal partnership with the United States and to ensure a sustainable founda-
tion for the U.S. military presence there. We are working together with our allies to develop a positive
security agenda for the region, focused on regional security, combating the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction, terrorism, climate change, international piracy, epidemics, and cybersecurity, while
achieving balanced growth and human rights.

In partnership with our allies, the United States is helping to offer a future of security and integration
to all Asian nations and to uphold and extend fundamental rights and dignity to all of its people. These
alliances have preserved a hard-earned peace and strengthened the bridges of understanding across the
Paciﬁc Ocean in the second halfofthe 20th century, and it is essential to U.S., Asian, and global security
that they are as dynamic and effective in the 21 st century.

North America:The strategic partnerships and unique relationships we maintain with Canada and
Mexico are critical to U.S. national security and have a direct effect on the security of our homeland. With
billions ofdollars in trade, shared critical infrastructure, and millions ofour citizens moving across our
common borders, no two countries are more directly connected to our daily lives. We must change the
way we think about our shared borders, in order to secure and expedite the |a\Nfu| and legitimate ﬂow
of people and goods while interdicting transnational threat that threaten our open societies.

Canada is our closest trading partner, a steadfast security ally, and an important partner in regional
and global efforts. Our mutual prosperity is closely interconnected, including through our trade rela-
tionship with Mexico through NAFTA. With Canada, our security cooperation includes our defense of
North America and our efforts through NATO overseas. And ourcooperation is critical to the success of
international efforts on issues ranging from international climate negotiations to economic cooperation
through the G-20.

With Mexico, in addition to trade cooperation, we are working together to identify and interdict threats
at the earliest opportu nity, even before they reach North America. Stability and security in Mexico are

42

III. ADVANCING OUR INTERESTS

indispensable to building a strong economic partnership, ﬁghting the illicit drug and arms trade, and
promoting sound immigration policy.

Build Cooperation with Other21st Century Centers of Inﬂuence

The United States is part of a dynamic international environment, in which different nations are exerting
greater inﬂuence, and advancing our interests will require expanding spheres of cooperation around the
word. Certain bilateral re|ationships—such as U.S. relations with China, India, and Russia—wi|| be critical
to building broader cooperation on areas of mutual interest. And emerging powers in every region ofthe
world are increasingly asserting themselves, raising opportunities for partnership for the United States.

Asia: Asia's dramatic economic growth has increased its connection to America's future prosperity, and
its emerging centers of inﬂuence make it increasingly important. We have taken substantial steps to
deepen our engagement in the region, through regional organizations, new dialogues, and high-level
dip|omacy.The United States has deep and enduring ties with the countries of the region, including
trade and investment that drive growth and prosperity on both sides of the Paciﬁc, and enhancing these
ties is critical to our efforts to advance balanced and sustainable growth and to doubling U.S. exports.
We have increasing security cooperation on issues such as violent extremism and nuclear proliferation.
We will work to advance these mutual interests through our alliances, deepen our relationships with
emerging powers, and pursue a stronger role in the region's multilateral architecture, including the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), the Asia Paciﬁc Economic Cooperation forum, the
Trans-Paciﬁc Partnership, and the East Asia Summit.

We will continue to pursue a positive, constructive, and comprehensive relationship with China. We
welcome a China that takes on a responsible leadership role in working with the United States and the
international commu nity to advance priorities like economic recovery, confronting climate change, and
nonproliferation. We will monitor China's military modernization program and prepare accordingly to
ensure that U.S. interests and allies, regionally and globally, are not negatively affected. More broadly,
we will encourage China to make choices that contribute to peace, security, and prosperity as its inﬂu-
ence rises. We are using our newly established Strategic and Economic Dialogue to address a broader
range of issues, and improve communication between our militaries in order to reduce mistrust. We
will encourage continued reduction in tension between the People's Republic ofChina and Taiwan.We
will not agree on every issue, and we will be candid on our human rights concerns and areas where
we differ. But disagreements should not prevent cooperation on issues of mutual interest, because a
pragmatic and effective relationship between the United States and China is essential to address the
major challenges of the 21 st century.

The United States and India are building a strategic partnership that is underpinned by our shared
interests, our shared values as the world's two largest democracies, and close connections among our
people. India's responsible advancement serves as a positive example for developing nations, and
provides an opportunity for increased economic, scientiﬁc, environmental, and security partnership.
Working together through our Strategic Dialogue and high-level visits, we seek a broad-based relation-
ship in which India contributes to global counterterrorism efforts, nonproliferation, and helps promote
poverty-reduction, education, health, and sustainable agricu|ture.We value India's growing leadership

43

NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY

on a wide array ofglobal issues, through groups such as the G-20, and will seek to work with India to
promote stability in South Asia and elsewhere in the world.

Russia: We seek to build a stable, substantive, multidimensional relationship with Russia, based on
mutual interests. The United States has an interest in a strong, peaceful, and prosperous Russia that
respects international norms. As the two nations possessing the majority of the world's nuclear weap-
ons, we are working together to advance nonproliferation, both by reducing our nuclear arsenals and
by cooperating to ensure that other countries meet their international commitments to reducing the
spread of nuclear weapons around the wor|d.We will seekgreater partnership with Russia in confronting
violent extremism, especially in Afghanistan. We also will seek new trade and investment arrangements
for increasing the prosperity ofour peoples. We support efforts within Russia to promote the rule of
law, accountable government, and universal values. While actively seeking Russia's cooperation to act
as a responsible partner in Europe and Asia, we will support the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Russia's neighbors.

Emerging Centers of Inﬂuence: Due to increased economic growth and political stability, individual
nations are increasingly taking on powerful regional and global roles and changing the landscape of
international cooperation.To achieve ajust and sustainable order that advances our shared security and
prosperity, we are, therefore, deepening our partnerships with emerging powers and encouraging them
to play a greater role in strengthening international norms and advancing shared interests.

The rise of the G-20, for exam ple, as the premier international economic foru m, represents a distinct shift
in ourglobal international order toward greater cooperation between traditional major economies and
emerging centers of inﬂ uence. The nations com posing the G-20—from South Korea to South Africa,
Saudi Arabia to Argentina—represent at least 80 percent ofglobal gross national product, making it an
inﬂuential body on the world stage. Stabilizing our global economy, increasing energy efﬁciency arou nd
the globe, and addressing chronic hunger in poor countries are only three examples ofthe broad global
challenges that cannot be solved by a few countries alone.

|ndonesia—as the world's fourth most populous country, a member of the G-20, and a democracy—wi||
become an increasingly important partner on regional and transnational issues such as climate change,
counterterrorism, maritime security, peacekeeping, and disaster relief. With tolerance, resilience, and
multiculturalism as core values, and a ﬂourishing civil society, Indonesia is uniquely positioned to help
address challenges facing the developing world.

In the Americas, we are bound by proximity, integrated markets, energy interdependence, a broadly
shared commitment to democracy, and the rule of law. Our deep historical, familial, and cultural ties
make our alliances and partnerships critical to U.S. interests. We will work in equal partnership to advance
economic and social inclusion, safeguard citizen safety and security, promote clean energy, and defend
universal values of the people of the hemisphere.

We welcome Brazil's leadership and seek to move beyond dated North-South divisions to pursue
progress on bilateral, hemispheric, and global issues. Brazil's macroeconomic success, coupled with its
steps to narrow socioeconomic gaps, provide important lessons for countries throughout the Americas
and Africa. We will encourage Brazilian efforts against illicit transnational networks. As guardian of a
unique national environmental patrimony and a leader in renewable fuels, Brazil is an important partner

44

III. ADVANCING OUR INTERESTS

in confronting global climate change and promoting energy security. And in the context of the G-20
and the Doha round, we will work with Brazil to ensure that economic development and prosperity is
broadly shared.

We have an array ofenduring interests, longstanding commitments and new opportu nities for broaden-
ing and deepening relationships in the greater Middle East.This includes maintaining a strong partner-
ship with lsrael while supporting Israel's lasting integration into the region.The U.S. also will continue
to develop our key security relationships in the region with such Arab states as with Egypt, Jordan,
and Saudi Arabia and other Gu|fCooperation Council (GCC) countries—partnerships that enable our
militaries and defense systems to work together more effectively.

We have a strategic interest in ensuring that the social and economic needs and political rights of people
in this region, who represent one of the world's youngest populations, are met. We will continue to
press governments in the region to undertake political reforms and to loosen restrictions on speech,
assembly and media.We will maintain our strong support for civil society groups and those individuals
who stand up for universal rights. And we will continue to foster partnerships in areas like education,
economic growth, science, and health to help expand opportunity. On a multilateral basis, we seek to
advance shared security interests, such as through NATO's Istanbul Cooperation Initiative with the GCC,
and common interests in promoting governance and institutional reform through participating in the
Forum for the Future and other regional dialogues.

The diversity and complexity ofthe African continent offer the United States opportunities and chal-
lenges. As African states grow their economies and strengthen their democratic institutions and gov-
ernance, America will continue to embrace effective partnerships. Oureconomic, security, and political
cooperation will be consultative and encompass global, regional, and national priorities including access
to open markets, conﬂict prevention, global peacekeeping, cou nterterrorism, and the protection of vital
carbon sinks. The Administration will refocus its priorities on strategic interventions that can promote job
creation and economic growth; combat corruption while strengthening good governance and account-
ability; responsibly improve the capacity of African security and rule of law sectors; and work through
diplomatic dialogue to mitigate local and regional tensions before they become crises. We will also
reinforce sustainable stability in key states like Nigeria and Kenya that are essential subregional linchpins.

The United States will work to remain an attractive and inﬂuential partner by ensuring that African
priorities such as infrastructure development, improving reliable access to power, and increased trade
and investment remain high on our agenda. South Africa's inclusion in the G-20 should be followed by a
growing number ofemerging African nations who are charting a course toward improved governance
and meaningful development. South Africa's vibrant democracy, combined with its regional and global
leadership roles, is a critical partner. From peacemaking to climate change to capacity-building, South
Africa brings unique value and perspective to international initiatives. With its strong, diversiﬁed, well-
managed economy, it often serves as a springboard to the entire African continent, and we will work
to pursue shared interests in Africa's security, growth, and the development of Africa's human capital.

45

NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY

Strengthen Institutions and Mechanisms for Cooperation

Just as U.S. foresight and leadership were essential to forging the architecture for international coopera-
tion afterWor|d War II, we must again lead global efforts to modernize the infrastructure for international
cooperation in the 21st century. Indeed, our ability to advance peace, security, and opportunity will
turn on our ability to strengthen both our national and our multilateral capabi|ities.To solve problems,
we will pursue modes of cooperation that reﬂect evolving distributions of power and responsibility.
We need to assist existing institutions to perform effectively. When they come up short, we must seek
meaningful changes and develop alternative mechanisms.

Enhance Cooperation with and Strengthen the United Nations: We are enhancing our coordination
with the U.N. and its agencies.We need a U.N. capable offulﬁlling its founding purpose—maintaining
international peace and security, promoting global cooperation, and advancing human rights.To this
end, we are paying our bills. We are intensifying efforts with partners on and outside the U.N. Security
Council to ensure timely, robust, and credible Council action to address threats to peace and security. We
favor Security Council reform that enhances the U.N.’s overall performance, credibility, and legitimacy.
Across the broader U.N. system we support reforms that promote effective and efﬁcient leadership and
management ofthe U.N.’s international civil service, and we are working with U.N. personnel and mem-
ber states to strengthen the U.N.’s leadership and operational capacity in peacekeeping, humanitarian
relief, post-disaster recovery, development assistance, and the promotion of human rights. And we are
supporting new U.N. frameworks and capacities for combating transnational threats like proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction, infectious disease, drug-trafﬁcking, and cou nterterrorism.

Pursue Decisions though a Wide Range of Frameworks and Coalitions: We need to spur and harness a
new diversity ofinstru ments, alliances, and institutions in which a division of labor emerges on the basis
of effectiveness, competency, and long-term re|iabi|ity.This requires enhanced coordination among
the United Nations, regional organizations, international ﬁnancial institutions, specialized agencies,
and other actors that are better placed or equipped to manage certain threats and challenges. We are
attempting to forge new agreement on common global challenges among the world's leading and
emerging powers to ensure that multilateral cooperation reﬂects the sustained commitment oflnﬂuen-
tial countries.Whi|e we are pursuing G-8 initiatives with proven and long-standing partners, have begun
to shift the focus of oureconomic coordination to the G-20, which is more reﬂective of today's diffusion
of power and the need to enlist the efforts of a broader spectrum of countries across Asia to Europe,
Africa to the Middle East, and our neighbors in the Americas. We are also renewing U.S. leadership in
the multilateral development banks and the IMF, and leveraging our engagement and investments in
these institutions to strengthen the global economy, lift people out of poverty, advance food security,
address climate and pandemics, and secure fragile states such as Afghanistan and Haiti.

Invest in Regional Capabilities: Regional organizations can be particularly effective at mobilizing and
legitimating cooperation among countries closest to the problem. Regional organizations—whether
NATO, the Organization for Security Cooperation in Europe, the Organization of the Islamic Conference,
the African Union, Organization of American States, or ASEAN, and the Gulf Cooperation Cou nci|—vary
widely in their membership, constitutions, histories, orientation, and operational capabi|ities.That variety
needs to inform a strategic approach to their evolving roles and relative contributions to global security.

46

III. ADVANCING OUR INTERESTS

The United States is encouraging continued innovation and development of enhanced regional capabili-
ties in the context of an evolving division of labor among local, national, and global institutions that seeks
to leverage relative capacities. Where appropriate, we use training and related programs to strengthen
regional capacities for peacekeeping and conﬂict management to improve impact and share burdens.
We will also encourage a more comprehensive approach to regional security that brings balanced focus
to issues such as food security, global health, and education; access to more affordable and greener
forms of energy; access to fair and efﬁcientjustice; and a concerted effort to promote transparency at
all levels and to ﬁght the corrosive effect of corru ption.

Sustain Broad Cooperation on Key Global Challenges

Many of today's challenges cannot be solved by one nation or even a group of nations.The test of our
international order, therefore, will be its ability to facilitate the broad and effective global cooperation
necessary to meet 21 st century challenges. Many of these challenges have been discussed previously,
including violent extremism, nuclear proliferation, and promotion of global prosperity. In addition, other
key challenges requiring broad global cooperation include:

Climate Change:The danger from climate change is real, urgent, and severe.The change wrought by a
warming planet will lead to new conﬂicts over refugees and resources; new suffering from drought and
famine; catastrophic natural disasters; and the degradation of land across the g|obe.The United States
will therefore confront climate change based upon clear guidance from the science, and in cooperation
with all nations—for there is no effective solution to climate change that does not depend upon all
nations taking responsibility for their own actions and for the planet we will leave behind.

- Home: Our effort begins with the steps that we are taking at home. We will stimulate our energy
economy at home, reinvigorate the U.S. domestic nuclear industry, increase our efﬁciency
standards, invest in renewable energy, and provide the incentives that make clean energy the
proﬁtable kind ofenergy.This will allow us to make deep cuts in emissions—in the range of 1 7
percent by 2020 and more than 80 percent by 2050.This will depend in part upon comprehen-
sive legislation and its effective implementation.

- Abroad: Regionally, we will build on efforts in Asia, the Americas, and Africa to forge new clean
energy partnerships. Globally, we will seek to implement and build on the Copenhagen Accord,
and ensure a response to climate change that draws upon decisive action by all nations. Our goal
is an effective, international effort in which all major economies commit to ambitious national
action to reduce their emissions, nations meet their commitments in a transparent manner, and
the necessary ﬁnancing is mobilized so that developing countries can adapt to climate change,
mitigate its impacts, conserve forests, and invest in clean energy technologies. We will pursue
this global cooperation through multiple avenues, with a focus on advancing cooperation
that works. We accept the principle of common but differentiated responses and respective
capabilities, but will insist that any approach draws upon each nation taking responsibility for
its own actions.

Peacekeeping and Armed Conﬂict: The untold loss of human life, suffering, and property damage that
results from armed conﬂict necessitates that all responsible nations work to prevent it. No single nation

47

NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY

can or should shoulder the burden for managing or resolving the world's armed conﬂicts.To this end,
we will place renewed emphasis on deterrence and prevention by mobilizing diplomatic action, and
use development and security sector assistance to build the capacity of at-risk nations and reduce
the appeal of violent extremism. But when international forces are needed to respond to threats and
keep the peace, we will work with international partners to ensure they are ready, able, and wi||ing.We
will continue to build support in other countries to contribute to sustaining global peace and stability
operations, through U.N. peacekeeping and regional organizations, such as NATO and the African Union.
We will continue to broaden the pool oftroop and police contributors, working to ensure that they are
properly trained and equipped, that their mandates are matched to means, and that their missions are
backed by the political action necessary to build and sustain peace.

In Sudan, which has been marred by violent conﬂict for decades, the United States remains committed
to working with the international community to support implementation of outstanding elements of
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement and ensure that the referendum on the future of Southern Sudan
in 2011 happens on time and that its results are respected. In addition, we will continue to engage in the
efforts necessary to support peace and stability after the referendum, and continue to work to secure
peace, dignity, and accountability in Darfur.

- Prevent Genocide and Mass Atrocities:The United States and all member states of the U.N.
have endorsed the concept of the"Responsibi|ity to Protect.” In so doing, we have recognized
that the primary responsibility for preventing genocide and mass atrocity rests with sovereign
governments, but that this responsibility passes to the broader international community when
sovereign governments themselves commit genocide or mass atrocities, or when they prove
unable or unwilling to take necessary action to prevent or respond to such crimes inside their
borders. The United States is committed to working with our allies, and to strengthening our
own internal capabilities, in order to ensure that the United States and the international com-
munity are proactively engaged in a strategic effort to prevent mass atrocities and genocide.
In the event that prevention fails, the United States will work both multilaterally and bilaterally
to mobilize diplomatic, humanitarian, ﬁnancial, and—in certain instances—mi|itary means to
prevent and respond to genocide and mass atrocities.

- International Justice: From Nuremberg to Yugoslavia to Liberia, the United States has seen
that the end of impunity and the promotion ofjustice are notjust moral imperatives; they
are stabilizing forces in international affairs. The United States is thus working to strengthen
national justice systems and is maintaining our support for ad hoc international tribunals and
hybrid courts. Those who intentionally target innocent civilians must be held accountable, and
we will continue to support institutions and prosecutions that advance this important interest.
Although the United States is not at present a party to the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), and will always protect U.S. personnel, we are engaging with State Parties
to the Rome Statute on issues of concern and are su pporting the |CC’s prosecution of those cases
that advance U.S. interests and values, consistent with the requirements of U.S. law.

Pa ndemics and Infectious Disease:The threat of contagious disease transcends political bou ndaries, and
the ability to prevent, quickly detect and contain outbreaks with pandemic potential has never been so

48

III. ADVANCING OUR INTERESTS

im porta nt. An epidemic that begins in a single commu nity can quickly evolve into a multinational health
crisis that causes mil lions to suffer, as well as spark major disruptions to travel and trade. Addressing these
transnational risks requires advance preparation, extensive collaboration with the global community,
and the development ofa resilient population at home.

Recognizing that the health of the world's population has never been more interdependent, we
are improving our public health and medical capabilities on the front lines, including domestic and
international disease surveillance, situational awareness, rapid and reliable development of medical
countermeasures to respond to public health threats, preparedness education and training, and surge
capacity of the domestic health care system to respond to an inﬂux of patients due to a disaster or
emergency.These capabilities include our ability to work with international partners to mitigate and
contain disease when necessary.

We are enhancing international collaboration and strengthening multilateral institutions in order to
improve global surveillance and early warning capabilities and quickly enact control and containment
measures against the next pandemic threat. We continue to improve our understanding ofemerging
diseases and help develop environments that are less conducive to epidemic emergence. We depend
on U.S. overseas laboratories, relationships with host nation governments, and the willingness of states
to share health data with nongovernmental and international organizations. In this regard, we need to
continue to work to overcome the lack of openness and a general reluctance to share health information.
Finally, we seekto mitigate other problem areas, including limited global vaccine production capacity,
and the threat of emergent and reemergent disease in poorly governed states.

Transnational Criminal Threats and Threats to Governance:Transnationa| criminal threats and illicit
trafﬁcking networks continue to expand dramatically in size, scope, and inﬂ uence—posing signiﬁcant
national security challenges for the United States and our partner cou ntries.These threats cross borders
and continents and undermine the stability of nations, subverting government institutions through
corruption and harming citizens worldwide. Transnational criminal organizations have accumulated
unprecedented wealth and power through trafﬁcking and other illicit activities, penetrating legitimate
ﬁnancial systems and destabilizing commercial markets.They extend their reach by forming alliances
with government ofﬁcials and some state security services. The crime-terror nexus is a serious concern
as terrorists use criminal networks for logistical support and funding. Increasingly, these networks are
involved in cyber crime, which cost consumers billions of dollars annually, while undermining global
conﬁdence in the international ﬁnancial system.

Combating transnational criminal and trafﬁcking networks requires a multidimensional strategy that
safeguards citizens, breaks the ﬁnancial strength of criminal and terrorist networks, disrupts illicit trafﬁck-
ing networks, defeats transnational criminal organizations, ﬁghts government corruption, strengthens
the rule of law, bolstersjudicial systems, and improves transparency. While these are major challenges,
the United States will be able to devise and execute a collective strategy with other nations facing the
same threats.

Safeguarding the Global Commons: Across the globe, we must work in concert with allies and partners
to optimize the use ofshared sea, air, and space domains.These shared areas, which exist outside exclu-
sive national jurisdictions, are the connective tissue around our globe upon which all nations’ security

49

NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY

and prosperity depend.The United States will continue to help safeguard access, promote security,
and ensure the sustainable use of resources in these domains.These efforts require strong multilateral
cooperation, enhanced domain awareness and monitoring, and the strengthening of international
norms and standards.

We must work together to ensure the constant ﬂow of commerce, facilitate safe and secure air travel,
and prevent disruptions to critical communications. We must also safeguard the sea, air, and space
domains from those who would deny access or use them for hostile purposes. This includes keeping
strategic straits and vital sea lanes open, improving the early detection of emerging maritime threats,
denying adversaries hostile use of the air domain, and ensuring the responsible use of space. As one
key effort in the sea domain, for example, we will pursue ratiﬁcation of the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea.

Many of these goals are equally applicable to cyberspace. While cyberspace relies on the digital infra-
structure of individual countries, such infrastructure is globally connected, and securing it requires global
cooperation. We will push for the recognition of norms of behavior in cyberspace, and otherwise work
with global partners to ensure the protection ofthe free ﬂow ofinformation and our continued access.
At all times, we will continue to defend our digital networks from intrusion and harmful disru ption.

Arctic Interests: The United States is an Arctic Nation with broad and fundamental interests in the Arctic
region, where we seek to meet our national security needs, protect the environment, responsibly
manage resources, account for indigenous communities, support scientiﬁc research, and strengthen
international cooperation on a wide range of issues.

50

Lalo

IV. Conclusion

“It’s easy to forget that, when this War began, We were united, bound together by the
fresh memory of a horriﬁc attack and by the determination to defend our homeland
and the values We hold dear. I refuse to accept the notion that We cannot summon that
unity again. I believe with every ﬁber of my being that we, as Americans, can still come
together behind a common purpose, for our values are not simply words written into
parchment. They are a creed that calls us together and that has carried us through the
darkest of storms as one nation, as one people.”

—President Barack Obama, West Point, New York, December 2, 2009

This strategy calls for a comprehensive range of national actions, and a broad conception ofwhat con-
stitutes our national security. Above all, it is about renewing our leadership by calling upon what is best
about America—our innovation and capacity; our openness and moral imagination.

Success will require approaches that can be sustained and achieve results. One ofthe reasons that this
nation succeeded in the second halfof the 20th century was its capacity to pursue policies and build
institutions that endured across multiple Administrations, while also preserving the ﬂexibility to endure
setbacks and to make necessary adjustments. In some instances, the United States has been able to
carry forward this example in the years since the Cold War. But there are also many open questions,
unﬁnished reforms, and deep divisions—at home and abroad—that constrain our ability to advance
our interests and renew our leadership.

To effectively craft and implement a sustainable, results-oriented national security strategy, there m ust
be effective cooperation between the branches of government.This Administration believes that we
are strong when we act in line with our laws, as the Constitution itselfdemands. This Administration is
also committed to active consultation with Congress, and welcomes robust and effective oversight ofits
national security policies. We welcome Congress as a full partner in forging durable solutions to tough
challenges, looking beyond the headlines to take a long view ofAmerica’s interests. And we encour-
age Congress to pursue oversight in line with the reforms that have been enacted through legislation,
particularly in the years since 9/11.

The executive branch must do its part by developing integrated plans and approaches that leverage
the capabilities across its departments and agencies to deal with the issues we confront. Collaboration
across the government—and with our partners at the state, local, and tribal levels of government, in
industry, and abroad—must guide our actions.

This kind ofeffective cooperation will depend upon broad and bipartisan cooperation.Throughout the
Cold War, even as there were intense disagreements about certain courses of action, there remained a
belief that America's political leaders shared common goals, even ifthey differed about how to reach
them. In today's political environment, due to the actions of both parties that sense of com mon purpose
is at times lacking in our national security dia|ogue.This division places the United States at a strategic

NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY

disadvantage. It sets back our ability to deal with difﬁcult challenges and injects a sense of anxiety
and polarization into our politics that can affect our policies and our posture around the world. It must
be replaced by a renewed sense of civility and a commitment to embrace our common purpose as
Americans.

Americans are by nature a conﬁdent and optimistic people. We would not have achieved our position of
leadership in the world without the extraordinary strength of ou r founding docu ments and the capability
and courage of generations of Americans who gave life to those va|ues—through their service, through
their sacriﬁces, through their aspirations, and through their pursuit of a more perfect union.We see those
same qualities today, particularly in ouryoung men and women in uniform who have served tourafter
tour ofduty to defend our nation in harm's way, and their civilian counterparts.

This responsibility cannot be theirs alone. And there is no question that we, as a nation, can meet our
responsibility as Americans once more. Even in a world ofenormous challenges, no threat is bigger than
the American peop|es'capacity to meet it, and no opportunity exceeds our reach. We continue to draw
strength from those founding documents that established the creed that binds us together. We, too,
can demonstrate the capability and courage to pursue a more perfect union and—in doing so—renew
American leadership in the world.

52

